THE REASON FOR GOD

THE REASON FOR GOD
Belief in an Age of Skepticism

TIMOTHY KELLER

DUTTON

DUTTON

Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario
M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.); Penguin Books
Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England; Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s
Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd); Penguin Group
(Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a
division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd); Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India; Penguin
Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a
division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd); Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd,
24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
England
Published by Dutton, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Copyright © 2008 by Timothy Keller
All rights reserved
REGISTERED TRADEMARK—MARCA REGISTRADA
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Keller, Timothy J., 1950–
The reason for God: belief in an age of skepticism / Timothy Keller.
p. cm.
ISBN: 978-1-1012-1765-8
1. Apologetics. 2. Faith 3. Skepticism. I. Title.
BT1103.K45 2008
239—dc22
2007043745
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of

both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by
law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate
in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the
author’s rights is appreciated.
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers
and Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the
author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur after
publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not
assume any responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.

To Kathy, the Valiant

CONTENTS

Introduction

PART 1: THE LEAP OF DOUBT
ONE

There Can’t Be Just One True Religion
TWO

How Could a Good God Allow Suffering?
THREE

Christianity Is a Straitjacket
FOUR

The Church Is Responsible for So Much Injustice
FIVE

How Can a Loving God Send People to Hell?
SIX

Science Has Disproved Christianity
SEVEN

You Can’t Take the Bible Literally

[Intermission 115]

PART 2: THE REASONS FOR FAITH

EIGHT

The Clues of God
NINE

The Knowledge of God
TEN

The Problem of Sin
ELEVEN

Religion and the Gospel
TWELVE

The (True) Story of the Cross
THIRTEEN

The Reality of the Resurrection
FOURTEEN

The Dance of God
Epilogue: Where Do We Go from Here?

Acknowledgments

Notes
Index
About the Author

INTRODUCTION

I find your lack of faith—disturbing.
—Darth Vader
The Enemies Are Both Right
There is a great gulf today between what is popularly known as liberalism and
conservatism. Each side demands that you not only disagree with but disdain the
other as (at best) crazy or (at worst) evil. This is particularly true when religion
is the point at issue. Progressives cry out that fundamentalism is growing rapidly
and nonbelief is stigmatized. They point out that politics has turned toward the
right, supported by mega-churches and mobilized orthodox believers.
Conservatives endlessly denounce what they see as an increasingly skeptical and
relativistic society. Major universities, media companies, and elite institutions
are heavily secular, they say, and they control the culture.
Which is it? Is skepticism or faith on the ascendancy in the world today? The
answer is Yes. The enemies are both right. Skepticism, fear, and anger toward
traditional religion are growing in power and influence. But at the same time,
robust, orthodox belief in the traditional faiths is growing as well.
The non-churchgoing population in the United States and Europe is steadily
increasing.1 The number of Americans answering “no religious preference” to
poll questions has skyrocketed, having doubled or even tripled in the last
decade.2 A century ago most U.S. universities shifted from a formally Christian
foundation to an overtly secular one.3 As a result, those with traditional religious
beliefs have little foothold in any of the institutions of cultural power. But even
as more and more people identify themselves as having “no religious
preference,” certain churches with supposedly obsolete beliefs in an infallible

Bible and miracles are growing in the United States and exploding in Africa,
Latin America, and Asia. Even in much of Europe, there is some growth in
church attendance.4 And despite the secularism of most universities and
colleges, religious faith is growing in some corners of academia. It is estimated
that 10 to 25 percent of all the teachers and professors of philosophy in the
country are orthodox Christians, up from less than 1 percent just thirty years
ago.5 Prominent academic Stanley Fish may have had an eye on that trend when
he reported, “When Jacques Derrida died [in November 2004] I was called by a
reporter who wanted to know what would succeed high theory and the
triumvirate of race, gender, and class as the center of intellectual energy in the
academy. I answered like a shot: religion.”6
In short, the world is polarizing over religion. It is getting both more
religious and less religious at the same time. There was once a confident belief
that secular European countries were the harbingers for the rest of the world.
Religion, it was thought, would thin out from its more robust, supernaturalist
forms or die out altogether. But the theory that technological advancement brings
inevitable secularization is now being scrapped or radically rethought.7 Even
Europe may not face a secular future, with Christianity growing modestly and
Islam growing exponentially.
The Two Camps
I speak from an unusual vantage point on this two-edged phenomenon. I was
raised in a mainline Lutheran church in eastern Pennsylvania. When I reached
my teens in the early 1960s, the time came for me to attend confirmation class, a
two-year course that covered Christian beliefs, practices, and history. Its aim was
to bring young people into a fuller understanding of the faith, so they could
publicly commit to it. My teacher for the first year was a retired minister. He was
quite traditional and conservative, speaking often of the danger of hell and the
need for great faith. In the second year of the course, however, the instructor was
a new, young cleric just out of seminary. He was a social activist and was filled
with deep doubts about traditional Christian doctrine. It was almost like being
instructed in two different religions. In the first year, we stood before a holy, just
God whose wrath could only be turned aside at great effort and cost. In the
second year, we heard of a spirit of love in the universe, who mainly required
that we work for human rights and the liberation of the oppressed. The main
question I wanted to ask our instructors was, “Which one of you is lying?” But

fourteen-year-olds are not so bold, and I just kept my mouth shut.
My family later found its way to a more conservative church in a small
Methodist denomination. For several years this strengthened what could be
called the “Hellfire Layer” of my religious formation, although the pastor and
people there were personally as gentle as could be. Then I went off to one of
those fine, liberal, smaller universities in the Northeast, which quickly began to
throw water on the hellfire in my imagination.
The history and philosophy departments were socially radicalized and were
heavily influenced by the neo-Marxist critical theory of the Frankfurt School. In
1968, this was heady stuff. The social activism was particularly attractive, and
the critique of American bourgeoisie society was compelling, but its
philosophical underpinnings were confusing to me. I seemed to see two camps
before me, and there was something radically wrong with both of them. The
people most passionate about social justice were moral relativists, while the
morally upright didn’t seem to care about the oppression going on all over the
world. I was emotionally drawn to the former path—what young person
wouldn’t be? Liberate the oppressed and sleep with who you wanted! But I kept
asking the question, “If morality is relative, why isn’t social justice as well?”
This seemed to be a blatant inconsistency in my professors and their followers.
Yet now I saw the stark contradiction in the traditional churches. How could I
turn back to the kind of orthodox Christianity that supported segregation in the
South and apartheid in South Africa? Christianity began to seem very unreal to
me, though I was unable to discern a viable alternative way of life and thought.
I didn’t know it at the time, but this spiritual “unreality” stemmed from three
barriers that lay across my path. During my college years, these three barriers
eroded and my faith became vital and life-affecting. The first barrier was an
intellectual one. I was confronted with a host of tough questions about
Christianity: “What about other religions? What about evil and suffering? How
could a loving God judge and punish? Why believe anything at all?” I began to
read books and arguments on both sides of these issues and slowly but surely,
Christianity began to make more and more sense. The rest of this book lays out
why I still think so.
The second barrier was an interior, personal one. As a child, the plausibility
of a faith can rest on the authority of others, but when we reach adulthood there
is a need for personal, firsthand experience as well. While I had “said my

prayers” for years, and while I sometimes had that inspirational, aesthetic sense
of wonder at the sight of a sea or mountain, I had never experienced God’s
presence personally. This required not so much knowledge of techniques for
prayer, but a process in which I came to grips with my own needs, flaws, and
problems. It was painful, and was, as is typical, triggered by disappointments
and failures. It would take another, different kind of book to go into them. But it
needs to be said that faith-journeys are never simply intellectual exercises.
The third barrier was a social one. I desperately needed to find a “third
camp,” a group of Christians who had a concern for justice in the world but who
grounded it in the nature of God rather than in their own subjective feelings.
When I found that “band of brothers”—and sisters ( just as important!)—things
began to change for me. These three barriers did not come down quickly or in
any set order. Rather they were intertwined and dependent on one another. I did
not work through them in any methodical way. It’s only in hindsight that I see
how the three factors worked together. Because I was always looking for that
third camp, I became interested in shaping and initiating new Christian
communities. That meant the ministry, so I entered it just a few years after
college.
The View from Manhattan
In the late 1980s, my wife, Kathy, and I moved to Manhattan with our three
young sons to begin a new church for a largely non-churchgoing population.
During the research phase I was told by almost everyone that it was a fool’s
errand. Church meant moderate or conservative; the city was liberal and edgy.
Church meant families; New York City was filled with young singles and
“nontraditional” households. Church most of all meant belief, but Manhattan
was the land of skeptics, critics, and cynics. The middle class, the conventional
market for a church, was fleeing the city because of crime and rising costs. That
left the sophisticated and hip, the wealthy and the poor. Most of these people just
laugh at the idea of church, I was told. Congregations in the city were dwindling,
most struggling to even maintain their buildings.
Many of my early contacts said that the few congregations that had
maintained a following had done so by adapting traditional Christian teaching to
the more pluralistic ethos of the city. “Don’t tell people they have to believe in
Jesus—that’s considered narrow-minded here.” They were incredulous when I

explained that the beliefs of the new church would be the orthodox, historic
tenets of Christianity—the infallibility of the Bible, the deity of Christ, the
necessity of spiritual regeneration (the new birth)—all doctrines considered
hopelessly dated by the majority of New Yorkers. Nobody ever said
“fuggedaboutit” out loud, but it always hung in the air.
Nevertheless, we launched Redeemer Presbyterian Church, and by the end of
2007 it had grown to more than 5,000 attendees and had spawned more than a
dozen daughter congregations in the immediate metropolitan area. The church is
quite multiethnic and young (average age about thirty) and is more than twothirds single. Meanwhile, dozens of other similarly orthodox-believing
congregations have sprung up in Manhattan and hundreds of others throughout
the four other boroughs. One survey showed that in the last several years more
than a hundred churches had been started in New York City by Christians from
Africa alone. We were as stunned by this as anyone.
New York isn’t alone. In the fall of 2006 The Economist ran a story with the
subtitle “Christianity is collapsing everywhere but London.” The crux of the
article was that despite the fact that church attendance and profession of the
Christian faith was plummeting across Britain and Europe, many young
professionals (and new immigrants) in London were flocking to evangelical
churches.8 That is exactly what I’ve seen here.
This leads to a strange conclusion. We have come to a cultural moment in
which both skeptics and believers feel their existence is threatened because both
secular skepticism and religious faith are on the rise in significant, powerful
ways. We have neither the Western Christendom of the past nor the secular,
religionless society that was predicted for the future. We have something else
entirely.
A Divided Culture
Three generations ago, most people inherited rather than chose their religious
faith. The great majority of people belonged to one of the historic, mainline
Protestant churches or the Roman Catholic Church. Today, however, the nowdubbed “old-line” Protestant churches of cultural, inherited faith are aging and
losing members rapidly. People are opting instead for a nonreligious life, for a
non-institutional, personally constructed spirituality, or for orthodox, high-

commitment religious groups that expect members to have a conversion
experience. Therefore the population is paradoxically growing both more
religious and less religious at once.
Because doubt and belief are each on the rise, our political and public
discourse on matters of faith and morality has become deadlocked and deeply
divided. The culture wars are taking a toll. Emotions and rhetoric are intense,
even hysterical. Those who believe in God and Christianity are out to “impose
their beliefs on the rest of us” and “turn back the clock” to a less enlightened
time. Those who don’t believe are “enemies of truth” and “purveyors of
relativism and permissiveness.” We don’t reason with the other side; we only
denounce.
We have an impasse between the strengthening forces of doubt and belief,
and this won’t be solved simply by calling for more civility and dialogue.
Arguments depend on having commonly held reference points that both sides
can hold each other to. When fundamental understandings of reality conflict, it is
hard to find anything to which to appeal. The title of Alasdair MacIntyre’s book,
Whose Justice? Which Rationality? says it all. Our problems are not going away
soon.
How can we find a way forward?
First, each side should accept that both religious belief and skepticism are on
the rise. Atheist author Sam Harris and Religious Right leader Pat Robertson
should each admit the fact that his particular tribe is strong and increasing in
influence. This would eliminate the self-talk that is rampant in each camp,
namely that it will soon be extinct, overrun by the opposition. Nothing like that
is imminently possible. If we stopped saying such things to ourselves it might
make everyone more civil and generous toward opposing views.
Such an admission is not only reassuring, but also humbling. There are still
many of a secular turn of mind who confidently say orthodox faith is vainly
trying to “resist the tide of history,” though there is no historical evidence that
religion is dying out at all. Religious believers should also be much less
dismissive of secular skepticism. Christians should reflect on the fact that such
large sectors of our formerly largely Christian societies have turned their backs
on faith. Surely that should lead to self-examination. The time for making
elegant dismissive gestures toward the other side is past. Something more is now

required. But what?
A Second Look at Doubt
I want to make a proposal that I have seen bear much fruit in the lives of young
New Yorkers over the years. I recommend that each side look at doubt in a
radically new way.
Let’s begin with believers. A faith without some doubts is like a human body
without any antibodies in it. People who blithely go through life too busy or
indifferent to ask hard questions about why they believe as they do will find
themselves defenseless against either the experience of tragedy or the probing
questions of a smart skeptic. A person’s faith can collapse almost overnight if
she has failed over the years to listen patiently to her own doubts, which should
only be discarded after long reflection.
Believers should acknowledge and wrestle with doubts—not only their own
but their friends’ and neighbors’. It is no longer sufficient to hold beliefs just
because you inherited them. Only if you struggle long and hard with objections
to your faith will you be able to provide grounds for your beliefs to skeptics,
including yourself, that are plausible rather than ridiculous or offensive. And,
just as important for our current situation, such a process will lead you, even
after you come to a position of strong faith, to respect and understand those who
doubt.
But even as believers should learn to look for reasons behind their faith,
skeptics must learn to look for a type of faith hidden within their reasoning. All
doubts, however skeptical and cynical they may seem, are really a set of
alternate beliefs.9 You cannot doubt Belief A except from a position of faith in
Belief B. For example, if you doubt Christianity because “There can’t be just one
true religion,” you must recognize that this statement is itself an act of faith. No
one can prove it empirically, and it is not a universal truth that everyone accepts.
If you went to the Middle East and said, “There can’t be just one true religion,”
nearly everyone would say, “Why not?” The reason you doubt Christianity’s
Belief A is because you hold unprovable Belief B. Every doubt, therefore, is
based on a leap of faith.
Some people say, “I don’t believe in Christianity because I can’t accept the

existence of moral absolutes. Everyone should determine moral truth for him-or
herself.” Is that a statement they can prove to someone who doesn’t share it? No,
it is a leap of faith, a deep belief that individual rights operate not only in the
political sphere but also in the moral. There is no empirical proof for such a
position. So the doubt (of moral absolutes) is a leap.
Some will respond to all this, “My doubts are not based on a leap of faith. I
have no beliefs about God one way or another. I simply feel no need for God and
I am not interested in thinking about it.” But hidden beneath this feeling is the
very modern American belief that the existence of God is a matter of
indifference unless it intersects with my emotional needs. The speaker is betting
his or her life that no God exists who would hold you accountable for your
beliefs and behavior if you didn’t feel the need for him. That may be true or it
may not be true, but, again, it is quite a leap of faith.10
The only way to doubt Christianity rightly and fairly is to discern the
alternate belief under each of your doubts and then to ask yourself what reasons
you have for believing it. How do you know your belief is true? It would be
inconsistent to require more justification for Christian belief than you do for
your own, but that is frequently what happens. In fairness you must doubt your
doubts. My thesis is that if you come to recognize the beliefs on which your
doubts about Christianity are based, and if you seek as much proof for those
beliefs as you seek from Christians for theirs—you will discover that your
doubts are not as solid as they first appeared.
I commend two processes to my readers. I urge skeptics to wrestle with the
unexamined “blind faith” on which skepticism is based, and to see how hard it is
to justify those beliefs to those who do not share them. I also urge believers to
wrestle with their personal and culture’s objections to the faith. At the end of
each process, even if you remain the skeptic or believer you have been, you will
hold your own position with both greater clarity and greater humility. Then there
will be an understanding, sympathy, and respect for the other side that did not
exist before. Believers and nonbelievers will rise to the level of disagreement
rather than simply denouncing one another. This happens when each side has
learned to represent the other’s argument in its strongest and most positive form.
Only then is it safe and fair to disagree with it. That achieves civility in a
pluralistic society, which is no small thing.

A Spiritual Third Way?
The rest of this book is a distillation of the many conversations I’ve had with
doubters over the years. In both my preaching and personal interactions I’ve
tried to respectfully help skeptics look at their own faith-foundations while at the
same time laying bare my own to their strongest criticisms. In the first half of
this volume we will review the seven biggest objections and doubts about
Christianity I’ve heard from people over the years. I will respectfully discern the
alternate beliefs beneath each of them. Then in the second half of the book we
will examine the reasons underlying Christian beliefs.
Respectful dialogue between entrenched traditional conservative and secular
liberal people is a great good, and I hope this book will promote it. But my
experience as a pastor in New York has given me another incentive to write this
volume. As soon as I arrived in New York I realized that the faith and doubt
situation was not what the experts thought it was. Older white people who ran
the cultural business of the city definitely were quite secular. But among the
increasingly multiethnic younger professionals and the working-class
immigrants there was a lush, category-defying variety of strong religious beliefs.
And Christianity, in particular, was growing rapidly among them.
I think these younger Christians are the vanguard of some major new
religious, social, and political arrangements that could make the older form of
culture wars obsolete. After they wrestle with doubts and objections to
Christianity many come out on the other side with an orthodox faith that doesn’t
fit the current categories of liberal Democrat or conservative Republican. Many
see both sides in the “culture war” making individual freedom and personal
happiness the ultimate value rather than God and the common good. Liberals’
individualism comes out in their views of abortion, sex, and marriage.
Conservatives’ individualism comes out in their deep distrust of the public sector
and in their understanding of poverty as simply a failure of personal
responsibility. The new, fast-spreading multiethnic orthodox Christianity in the
cities is much more concerned about the poor and social justice than Republicans
have been, and at the same time much more concerned about upholding classic
Christian moral and sexual ethics than Democrats have been.
While the first half of the book lays out a pathway that many of these
Christians have taken through doubt, the second half of the book is a more
positive exposition of the faith they are living out in the world. Here are three

people at the church now.
June was a graduate of an Ivy League university, living and working in
Manhattan. She became so obsessed with her physical image that she developed
eating disorders and substance addictions. She came to see that she was heading
for self-destruction, but she also realized that she had no particular reason to stop
being reckless with her life. After all, what did her life mean? Why not be selfdestructive? She turned to church and sought an understanding of God’s mercy
and an experience of his reality. She saw a counselor at the church who helped
her draw a connection between the mercy of God and her seemingly
inexhaustible need for acceptance. Finally she had the confidence to seek an
encounter with God himself. Though she can’t pinpoint one moment, she came
to feel, for the first time, “unconditionally loved as a true daughter of God.”
Gradually she received freedom from her self-destructive behavior.
Jeffrey was a New York City musician, raised in a conservative Jewish home.
Both his father and mother suffered terribly with cancer, his mother succumbing
to it. Because of a variety of physical ailments from his youth, he took up the
practice of Chinese healing arts, along with Taoist and Buddhist meditation, and
became extremely focused on physical wellness. He was in no state of “spiritual
need” when a friend began taking him to Redeemer. He liked the sermons “until
that Jesus business came around at the end” at which point he’d stop listening.
Soon, however, he became somewhat jealous of his Christian friends’ joy and
hope for the future that he had not encountered before. Then he began listening
to the ends of the sermons and realizing they posed an intellectual challenge that
he had not wanted to face. Finally, to his surprise, during his times of meditation
he discovered his “moments of normally pure quiet and stillness were constantly
interrupted by visions of Jesus on the cross.” He began to pray to the Christian
God, and soon he realized that his dominant life narrative had been the escape
and total avoidance of suffering. Now he saw how futile such a life goal was.
When he understood that Jesus had surrendered his physical health and life to
save the world—and him—it moved him deeply. He saw a way to get the
courage to face the inevitable suffering of the future, and to know there would be
a path through it. He embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Kelly was an Ivy League atheist. As a twelve-year-old, Kelly watched her
grandfather die of cancer and her two-year-old sister undergo surgery, chemo,

and radiation therapy for a brain tumor. By the time she was an undergraduate at
Columbia University, she had lost hope that life had any meaning to it. Several
of her Christian friends at college spoke to her of their faith, but she was “rocky
soil for the seeds” of their testimonies. However, when her sister had a stroke
and was paralyzed at the age of fourteen, it moved her not to give up on God but
to begin more deliberate searching. By then she was living and working in the
city. She met her future husband, Kevin, also a Columbia grad and an atheist,
who was working on Wall Street with J. P. Morgan. Their doubts about God
were very stubborn, and yet they had doubts about their doubts, and so they
began attending Redeemer. Their pilgrimage toward faith was slow and
painstaking. One of the things that kept them on the trail, however, was the large
number of believing Christians they met that were every bit as sophisticated and
smart as anyone else they’d met in the city. Finally they were not only convinced
of Christianity’s intellectual credibility, but were attracted by its vision for life.
Kelly wrote, “As an atheist I thought I lived a moral, community-oriented,
concerned-with-social-justice kind of life, but Christianity had an even higher
standard—down to our thoughts and the state of our hearts. I accepted God’s
forgiveness and invited him into my life.” Kevin wrote, “While sitting in a
coffee shop reading C. S. Lewis’s Mere Christianity, I put down the book and
wrote in my notebook ‘the evidence surrounding the claims of Christianity is
simply overwhelming.’ I realized that my achievements were ultimately
unsatisfying, the approval of man is fleeting, that a carpe diem life lived solely
for adventure is just a form of narcissism and idolatry. And so I became a
believer in Christ.”11
Jesus and Our Doubts
Kelly’s account recalls how, as a struggler with doubt and faith, the passage
about Thomas in the New Testament was a comfort to her. There Jesus modeled
a view of doubt more nuanced than those of either modern skeptics or modern
believers. When Jesus confronted “doubting Thomas” he challenged him not to
acquiesce in doubt (“believe!”) and yet responded to his request for more
evidence. In another incident, Jesus meets a man who confesses that he is filled
with doubts (Mark 9:24), who says to Jesus, “Help thou my unbelief”—help me
with my doubts! In response to this honest admission, Jesus blesses him and
heals his son. Whether you consider yourself a believer or a skeptic, I invite you
to seek the same kind of honesty and to grow in an understanding of the nature
of your own doubts. The result will exceed anything you can imagine.

PART 1

THE LEAP OF DOUBT

ONE

THERE CAN’T BE JUST ONE
TRUE RELIGION

“How could there be just one true faith?” asked Blair, a twenty-four-year-old
woman living in Manhattan. “It’s arrogant to say your religion is superior and
try to convert everyone else to it. Surely all the religions are equally good and
valid for meeting the needs of their particular followers.”
“Religious exclusivity is not just narrow—it’s dangerous,” added Geoff, a
twentysomething British man also living in New York City. “Religion has led to
untold strife, division, and conflict. It may be the greatest enemy of peace in the
world. If Christians continue to insist that they have ‘the truth’—and if other
religions do this as well—the world will never know peace.”1

DURING my nearly two decades in New York City, I’ve had numerous
opportunities to ask people, “What is your biggest problem with Christianity?
What troubles you the most about its beliefs or how it is practiced?” One of the
most frequent answers I have heard over the years can be summed up in one
word: exclusivity.
I was once invited to be the Christian representative in a panel discussion at
a local college along with a Jewish rabbi and a Muslim imam. The panelists
were asked to discuss the differences among religions. The conversation was
courteous, intelligent, and respectful in tone. Each speaker affirmed that there
were significant, irreconcilable differences between the major faiths. A case in
point was the person of Jesus. We all agreed on the statement: “If Christians are
right about Jesus being God, then Muslims and Jews fail in a serious way to love
God as God really is, but if Muslims and Jews are right that Jesus is not God but
rather a teacher or prophet, then Christians fail in a serious way to love God as
God really is.” The bottom line was—we couldn’t all be equally right about the

nature of God.
Several of the students were quite disturbed by this. One student insisted that
what mattered was to believe in God and to be a loving person yourself. To insist
that one faith has a better grasp of the truth than others was intolerant. Another
student looked at us clerics and said in his frustration, “We will never come to
know peace on earth if religious leaders keep on making such exclusive claims!”
It is widely believed that one of the main barriers to world peace is religion,
and especially the major traditional religions with their exclusive claims to
superiority. It may surprise you that though I am a Christian minister I agree with
this. Religion, generally speaking, tends to create a slippery slope in the heart.
Each religion informs its followers that they have “the truth,” and this naturally
leads them to feel superior to those with differing beliefs. Also, a religion tells its
followers that they are saved and connected to God by devotedly performing that
truth. This moves them to separate from those who are less devoted and pure in
life. Therefore, it is easy for one religious group to stereotype and caricature
other ones. Once this situation exists it can easily spiral down into the
marginalization of others or even to active oppression, abuse, or violence against
them.
Once we recognize how religion erodes peace on earth, what can we do
about it? There are three approaches that civic and cultural leaders around the
world are using to address the divisiveness of religion. There are calls to outlaw
religion, condemn religion, or at least to radically privatize it.2 Many people are
investing great hope in them. Unfortunately, I don’t believe any of them will be
effective. Indeed, I’m afraid they will only aggravate the situation.
1. Outlaw religion
One way to deal with the divisiveness of religion has been to control or even
forbid it with a heavy hand. There have been several massive efforts to do this in
the twentieth century. Soviet Russia, Communist China, the Khmer Rouge, and
(in a different way) Nazi Germany were all determined to tightly control
religious practice in an effort to stop it from dividing society or eroding the
power of the state. The result, however, was not more peace and harmony, but
more oppression. The tragic irony of the situation is brought out by Alister
McGrath in his history of atheism:

The 20th century gave rise to one of the greatest and most distressing paradoxes
of human history: that the greatest intolerance and violence of that century were
practiced by those who believed that religion caused intolerance and violence.3
Going hand in hand with such efforts was a widespread belief in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century that religion would weaken and die out as
the human race became more technologically advanced. This view saw religion
as playing a role in human evolution. We once needed religion to help us cope
with a very frightening, incomprehensible world. But as we become more
scientifically sophisticated and more able to understand and control our own
environment, our need for religion would diminish, it was thought.4
But this has not happened, and this “secularization thesis” is now largely
discredited.5 Virtually all major religions are growing in number of adherents.
Christianity’s growth, especially in the developing world, has been explosive.
There are now six times more Anglicans in Nigeria alone than there are in all of
the United States. There are more Presbyterians in Ghana than in the United
States and Scotland combined. Korea has gone from 1 percent to 40 percent
Christian in a hundred years, and experts believe the same thing is going to
happen in China. If there are half a billion Chinese Christians fifty years from
now, that will change the course of human history.6 In most cases, the
Christianity that is growing is not the more secularized, belief-thin versions
predicted by the sociologists. Rather, it is a robust supernaturalist kind of faith,
with belief in miracles, Scriptural authority, and personal conversion.
Because of the vitality of religious faith in the world, efforts to suppress or
control it often serve only to make it stronger. When the Chinese Communists
expelled Western missionaries after World War II, they thought they were killing
off Christianity in China. Instead, this move only served to make the leadership
of the Chinese church more indigenous and therefore to strengthen it.
Religion is not just a temporary thing that helped us adapt to our
environment. Rather it is a permanent and central aspect of the human condition.
This is a bitter pill for secular, nonreligious people to swallow. Everyone wants
to think that they are in the mainstream, that they are not extremists. But robust
religious beliefs dominate the world. There is no reason to expect that to change.
2. Condemn religion

Religion is not going away and its power cannot be diminished by government
control. But can’t we—via education and argument—find ways to socially
discourage religions that claim to have “the truth” and that try to convert others
to their beliefs? Couldn’t we find ways to urge all of our citizens, whatever their
religious beliefs, to admit that each religion or faith is just one of many equally
valid paths to God and ways to live in the world?
This approach creates an environment in which it is considered
unenlightened and outrageous to make exclusive religious claims, even in
personal conversations. It does so by stating and restating certain axioms that
eventually achieve the status of common sense. Those who deviate from them
are stigmatized as foolish or dangerous. Unlike the first strategy, this approach to
the divisiveness of religion is having some effect. It cannot ultimately succeed,
however, because at its heart is a fatal inconsistency, even perhaps a hypocrisy,
that will eventually lead to the collapse of this way of thinking. What follows are
several of these axioms and the problems with each.

“All major religions are equally valid and basically teach the same thing.”
This assertion is so common that one journalist recently wrote that anyone
who believed that “there are inferior religions” is a right-wing extremist.7 Do we
really want to say that the Branch Davidians or religions requiring child sacrifice
are not inferior to any other faith? The great majority of people would almost
certainly agree that they are.
Most people who assert the equality of religions have in mind the major
world faiths, not splinter sects. This was the form of the objection I got from the
student the night I was on the panel. He contended that doctrinal differences
between Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, and Hinduism were superficial
and insignificant, that they all believed in the same God. But when I asked him
who that God was, he described him as an all-loving Spirit in the universe. The
problem with this position is its inconsistency. It insists that doctrine is
unimportant, but at the same time assumes doctrinal beliefs about the nature of
God that are at loggerheads with those of the all the major faiths. Buddhism
doesn’t believe in a personal God at all. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam believe
in a God who holds people accountable for their beliefs and practices and whose
attributes could not be all reduced to love. Ironically, the insistence that doctrines
do not matter is really a doctrine itself. It holds a specific view of God, which is

touted as superior and more enlightened than the beliefs of most major religions.
So the proponents of this view do the very thing they forbid in others.

“Each religion sees part of spiritual truth, but none can see the whole truth.”
Sometimes this point is illustrated with the story of the blind men and the
elephant. Several blind men were walking along and came upon an elephant that
allowed them to touch and feel it. “This creature is long and flexible like a
snake” said the first blind man, holding the elephant’s trunk. “Not at all—it is
thick and round like a tree trunk,” said the second blind man, feeling the
elephant’s leg. “No, it is large and flat,” said the third blind man, touching the
elephant’s side. Each blind man could feel only part of the elephant—none could
envision the entire elephant. In the same way, it is argued, the religions of the
world each have a grasp on part of the truth about spiritual reality, but none can
see the whole elephant or claim to have a comprehensive vision of the truth.
This illustration backfires on its users. The story is told from the point of
view of someone who is not blind. How could you know that each blind man
only sees part of the elephant unless you claim to be able to see the whole
elephant?
There is an appearance of humility in the protestation that the truth is much
greater than any one of us can grasp, but if this is used to invalidate all claims to
discern the truth it is in fact an arrogant claim to a kind of knowledge which is
superior to [all others]…We have to ask: “What is the [absolute] vantage
ground from which you claim to be able to relativize all the absolute claims
these different scriptures make?”8
How could you possibly know that no religion can see the whole truth unless
you yourself have the superior, comprehensive knowledge of spiritual reality you
just claimed that none of the religions have?

“Religious belief is too culturally and historically conditioned to be ‘truth.’”
When I first came to New York City nearly twenty years ago, I more often
heard the objection that all religions are equally true. Now, however, I’m more

likely to be told that all religions are equally false. The objection goes like this:
“All moral and spiritual claims are the product of our particular historical and
cultural moment, and therefore no one should claim they can know the Truth,
since no one can judge whether one assertion about spiritual and moral reality is
truer than another.” The sociologist Peter L. Berger reveals the serious
inconsistency in this common assumption.
In his book A Rumor of Angels Berger recounts how the twentieth century
had uncovered “the sociology of knowledge,” namely that people believe what
they do largely because they are socially conditioned to do so. We like to think
that we think for ourselves, but it is not that simple. We think like the people we
most admire and need. Everyone belongs to a community that reinforces the
plausibility of some beliefs and discourages others. Berger notes that many have
concluded from this fact that, because we are all locked into our historical and
cultural locations, it is impossible to judge the rightness or wrongness of
competing beliefs.
Berger goes on, however, to point out that absolute relativism can only exist
if the relativists exempt themselves from their own razor.9 If you infer from the
social conditionedness of all belief that “no belief can be held as universally true
for everyone,” that itself is a comprehensive claim about everyone that is the
product of social conditions—so it cannot be true, on its own terms. “Relativity
relativizes itself,” says Berger, so we can’t have relativism “all the way down.”10
Our cultural biases make weighing competing truth-claims harder, yes. The
social conditionedness of belief is a fact, but it cannot be used to argue that all
truth is completely relative or else the very argument refutes itself. Berger
concludes that we cannot avoid weighing spiritual and religious claims by hiding
behind the cliché that “there’s no way to know the Truth.” We must still do the
hard work of asking: which affirmations about God, human nature, and spiritual
reality are true and which are false? We will have to base our life on some
answer to that question.
The philosopher Alvin Plantinga has his own version of Berger’s argument.
People often say to him, “If you were born in Morocco, you wouldn’t even be a
Christian, but rather a Muslim.” He responds:
Suppose we concede that if I had been born of Muslim parents in Morocco
rather than Christian parents in Michigan, my beliefs would have been quite

different. [But] the same goes for the pluralist…. If the pluralist had been born
in [Morocco] he probably wouldn’t be a pluralist. Does it follow that…his
pluralist beliefs are produced in him by an unreliable belief-producing process?
11

Plantinga and Berger make the same point. You can’t say, “All claims about
religions are historically conditioned except the one I am making right now.” If
you insist that no one can determine which beliefs are right and wrong, why
should we believe what you are saying? The reality is that we all make truthclaims of some sort and it is very hard to weigh them responsibly, but we have
no alternative but to try to do so.

“It is arrogant to insist your religion is right and to convert others to it.”
The noted religion scholar John Hick has written that once you become
aware that there are many other equally intelligent and good people in the world
who hold different beliefs from you and that you will not be able to convince
them otherwise, then it is arrogant for you to continue to try to convert them or
to hold your view to be the superior truth.12
Once again there is an inherent contradiction. Most people in the world don’t
hold to John Hick’s view that all religions are equally valid, and many of them
are equally as good and intelligent as he is, and unlikely to change their views.
That would make the statement “all religious claims to have a better view of
things are arrogant and wrong” to be, on its own terms, arrogant and wrong.
Many say that it is ethnocentric to claim that our religion is superior to
others. Yet isn’t that very statement ethnocentric? Most non-Western cultures
have no problem saying that their culture and religion is best. The idea that it is
wrong to do so is deeply rooted in Western traditions of self-criticism and
individualism. To charge others with the “sin” of ethnocentrism is really a way
of saying, “Our culture’s approach to other cultures is superior to yours.” We are
then doing the very thing we forbid others to do.13 The historian C. John
Sommerville has pointed out that “a religion can be judged only on the basis of
another religion.” You can’t evaluate a religion except on the basis of some
ethical criteria that in the end amounts to your own religious stance.14

By now the fatal flaw in this approach to religion in general and to
Christianity in particular should be obvious. Skeptics believe that any exclusive
claims to a superior knowledge of spiritual reality cannot be true. But this
objection is itself a religious belief. It assumes God is unknowable, or that God
is loving but not wrathful, or that God is an impersonal force rather than a person
who speaks in Scripture. All of these are unprovable faith assumptions. In
addition, their proponents believe they have a superior way to view things. They
believe the world would be a better place if everyone dropped the traditional
religions’ views of God and truth and adopted theirs. Therefore, their view is
also an “exclusive” claim about the nature of spiritual reality. If all such views
are to be discouraged, this one should be as well. If it is not narrow to hold this
view, then there is nothing inherently narrow about holding to traditional
religious beliefs.
Mark Lilla, a professor at the University of Chicago, spoke to a bright young
student at Wharton Business School who, to Lilla’s bafflement, had gone
forward at a Billy Graham crusade to give his life to Christ. Lilla writes:
I wanted to cast doubt on the step he was about to take, to help him see there are
other ways to live, other ways to seek knowledge, love…even selftransformation. I wanted to convince him his dignity depended on maintaining a
free, skeptical attitude towards doctrine. I wanted…to save him…
Doubt, like faith, has to be learned. It is a skill. But the curious thing about
skepticism is that its adherents, ancient and modern, have so often been
proselytizers. In reading them, I’ve often wanted to ask: “Why do you care?”
Their skepticism offers no good answer to that question. And I don’t have one for
myself.15
Lilla’s wise self-knowledge reveals his doubts about Christianity to be a
learned, alternate faith. He believes that the individual’s dignity as a human
being rests on doctrinal skepticism—which is, of course, an article of faith. As
he admits, he can’t avoid believing that it would be better for people if they
adopted his beliefs about reality and human dignity rather than Billy Graham’s.
It is no more narrow to claim that one religion is right than to claim that one
way to think about all religions (namely that all are equal) is right. We are all
exclusive in our beliefs about religion, but in different ways.

3. Keep religion completely private
Another approach to the divisiveness of religion is to allow that people may
privately believe their faith is the truth and may “evangelize” for their faith, but
that religious beliefs should be kept out of the public sphere. Influential thinkers
such as John Rawls and Robert Audi have argued that, in public political
discussions, we may not argue for a moral position unless it has a secular,
nonreligious grounding. Rawls is well known for insisting that what he calls
“comprehensive” religious views be excluded from public discourse.16 Recently
a large array of scientists and philosophers signed “A Declaration in Defense of
Science and Secularism,” which called on the leaders of our government “not to
permit legislation or executive action to be influenced by religious beliefs.”17
The signers included Peter Singer, E. O. Wilson, and Daniel C. Dennett. The
philosopher Richard Rorty, for example, has argued that religious faith must
remain a strictly private affair and must never be brought into discussions of
public policy. To ever use an argument grounded in a religious belief is simply a
“conversation stopper,” which the nonbeliever cannot engage.18
To those who complain that this approach discriminates against religion,
Rorty and others retort that this policy is simply pragmatic.19 They are not
ideologically opposed to religion per se, nor are they seeking to control religious
beliefs, so long as they are kept in the private sphere. However, in the public
square it is divisive and time-consuming to argue constantly over religion.
Religion-based positions are seen as sectarian and controversial, while secular
reasoning for moral positions are seen as universal and available to all.
Therefore, public discourse should be secular, never religious. Without reference
to any divine revelation or confessional tradition, we should work together on
the great problems of our time—such as AIDS, poverty, education, and so on.
We should keep our religious views to ourselves and unite around policies that
“work” best for the most people.
However, Stephen L. Carter of Yale responds that it is impossible to leave
religious views behind when we do any kind of moral reasoning at all.
Efforts to craft a public square from which religious conversation is absent, no
matter how thoughtfully worked out, will always in the end say to those of
organized religion that they alone, unlike everybody else, must enter public
dialogue only after leaving behind that part of themselves that they may consider

the most vital.20
How can Carter make such a claim? Let’s begin by asking what religion is.
Some say it is a form of belief in God. But that would not fit Zen Buddhism,
which does not really believe in God at all. Some say it is belief in the
supernatural. But that does not fit Hinduism, which does not believe in a
supernatural realm beyond the material world, but only a spiritual reality within
the empirical. What is religion then? It is a set of beliefs that explain what life is
all about, who we are, and the most important things that human beings should
spend their time doing. For example, some think that this material world is all
there is, that we are here by accident and when we die we just rot, and therefore
the important thing is to choose to do what makes you happy and not let others
impose their beliefs on you. Notice that though this is not an explicit,
“organized” religion, it contains a master narrative, an account about the
meaning of life along with a recommendation for how to live based on that
account of things.
Some call this a “worldview” while others call it a “narrative identity.” In
either case it is a set of faith-assumptions about the nature of things. It is an
implicit religion. Broadly understood, faith in some view of the world and
human nature informs everyone’s life. Everyone lives and operates out of some
narrative identity, whether it is thought out and reflected upon or not. All who
say “You ought to do this” or “You shouldn’t do that” reason out of such an
implicit moral and religious position. Pragmatists say that we should leave our
deeper worldviews behind and find consensus about “what works”—but our
view of what works is determined by (to use a Wendell Berry title) what we
think people are for. Any picture of happy human life that “works” is necessarily
informed by deep-seated beliefs about the purpose of human life.21 Even the
most secular pragmatists come to the table with deep commitments and narrative
accounts of what it means to be human.
Rorty insists that religion-based beliefs are conversation stoppers. But all of
our most fundamental convictions about things are beliefs that are nearly
impossible to justify to those who don’t share them. Secular concepts such as
“self-realization” and “autonomy” are impossible to prove and are “conversation
stoppers” just as much as appeals to the Bible.22
Statements that seem to be common sense to the speakers are nonetheless

often profoundly religious in nature. Imagine that Ms. A argues that all the safety
nets for the poor should be removed, in the name of “survival of the fittest.” Ms.
B might respond, “The poor have the right to a decent standard of living—they
are human beings like the rest of us!” Ms. A could then come back with the fact
that many bioethicists today think the concept of “human” is artificial and
impossible to define. She might continue that there is no possibility of treating
all living organisms as ends rather than means and that some always have to die
that others may live. That is simply the way nature works. If Ms. B counters with
a pragmatic argument, that we should help the poor simply because it makes
society work better, Ms. A could come up with many similar pragmatic
arguments about why letting some of the poor just die would be even more
efficient. Now Ms. B would be getting angry. She would respond heatedly that
starving the poor is simply unethical, but Ms. A could retort, “Who says ethics
must be the same for everyone?” Ms. B would finally exclaim: “I wouldn’t want
to live in a society like the one you are describing!”
In this interchange Ms. B has tried to follow John Rawls and find universally
accessible, “neutral and objective” arguments that would convince everyone that
we must not starve the poor. She has failed because there are none. In the end
Ms. B affirms the equality and dignity of human individuals simply because she
believes it is true and right. She takes as an article of faith that people are more
valuable than rocks or trees—though she can’t prove such a belief scientifically.
Her public policy proposals are ultimately based on a religious stance.23
This leads a legal theorist, Michael J. Perry, to conclude that it is “quixotic,
in any event, to attempt to construct an airtight barrier between religiously
grounded moral discourse…and [secular] discourse in public political
argument.”24 Rorty and others argue that religious argument is too controversial,
but Perry retorts in Under God? Religious Faith and Liberal Democracy that
secular grounds for moral positions are no less controversial than religious
grounds, and a very strong case can be made that all moral positions are at least
implicitly religious. Ironically, insisting that religious reasoning be excluded
from the public square is itself a controversial “sectarian” point of view.25
When you come out into the public square it is impossible to leave your
convictions about ultimate values behind. Let’s take marriage and divorce laws
as a case study. Is it possible to craft laws that we all agree “work” apart from
particular worldview commitments? I don’t believe so. Your views of what is
right will be based on what you think the purpose of marriage is. If you think

marriage is mainly for the rearing of children to benefit the whole society, then
you will make divorce very difficult. If you think the purpose of marriage is
more primarily for the happiness and emotional fulfillment of the adults who
enter it, you will make divorce much easier. The former view is grounded in a
view of human flourishing and well-being in which the family is more important
than the individual, as is seen in the moral traditions of Confucianism, Judaism,
and Christianity. The latter approach is a more individualistic view of human
nature based on the Enlightenment’s understanding of things. The divorce laws
you think “work” will depend on prior beliefs about what it means to be happy
and fully human.26 There is no objective, universal consensus about what that is.
Although many continue to call for the exclusion of religious views from the
public square, increasing numbers of thinkers, both religious and secular, are
admitting that such a call is itself religious.27
Christianity Can Save the World
I’ve argued against the effectiveness of all the main efforts to address the
divisiveness of religion in our world today. Yet I strongly sympathize with their
purpose. Religion can certainly be one of the major threats to world peace. At
the beginning of the chapter I outlined the “slippery slope” that every religion
tends to set up in the human heart. This slippery slope leads all too easily to
oppression. However, within Christianity—robust, orthodox Christianity—there
are rich resources that can make its followers agents for peace on earth.
Christianity has within itself remarkable power to explain and expunge the
divisive tendencies within the human heart.
Christianity provides a firm basis for respecting people of other faiths. Jesus
assumes that nonbelievers in the culture around them will gladly recognize much
Christian behavior as “good” (Matthew 5:16; cf. 1 Peter 2:12). That assumes
some overlap between the Christian constellation of values and those of any
particular culture28 and of any other religion.29 Why would this overlap exist?
Christians believe that all human beings are made in the image of God, capable
of goodness and wisdom. The Biblical doctrine of the universal image of God,
therefore, leads Christians to expect nonbelievers will be better than any of their
mistaken beliefs could make them. The Biblical doctrine of universal sinfulness
also leads Christians to expect believers will be worse in practice than their
orthodox beliefs should make them. So there will be plenty of ground for
respectful cooperation.

Christianity not only leads its members to believe people of other faiths have
goodness and wisdom to offer, it also leads them to expect that many will live
lives morally superior to their own. Most people in our culture believe that, if
there is a God, we can relate to him and go to heaven through leading a good
life. Let’s call this the “moral improvement” view. Christianity teaches the very
opposite. In the Christian understanding, Jesus does not tell us how to live so we
can merit salvation. Rather, he comes to forgive and save us through his life and
death in our place. God’s grace does not come to people who morally outperform
others, but to those who admit their failure to perform and who acknowledge
their need for a Savior.
Christians, then, should expect to find nonbelievers who are much nicer,
kinder, wiser, and better than they are. Why? Christian believers are not accepted
by God because of their moral performance, wisdom, or virtue, but because of
Christ’s work on their behalf. Most religions and philosophies of life assume that
one’s spiritual status depends on your religious attainments. This naturally leads
adherents to feel superior to those who don’t believe and behave as they do. The
Christian gospel, in any case, should not have that effect.
It is common to say that “fundamentalism” leads to violence, yet as we have
seen, all of us have fundamental, unprovable faith-commitments that we think
are superior to those of others. The real question, then, is which fundamentals
will lead their believers to be the most loving and receptive to those with whom
they differ? Which set of unavoidably exclusive beliefs will lead us to humble,
peace-loving behavior?
One of the paradoxes of history is the relationship between the beliefs and
the practices of the early Christians as compared to those of the culture around
them.
The Greco-Roman world’s religious views were open and seemingly tolerant
—everyone had his or her own God. The practices of the culture were quite
brutal, however. The Greco-Roman world was highly stratified economically,
with a huge distance between the rich and poor. By contrast, Christians insisted
that there was only one true God, the dying Savior Jesus Christ. Their lives and
practices were, however, remarkably welcoming to those that the culture
marginalized. The early Christians mixed people from different races and classes
in ways that seemed scandalous to those around them. The Greco-Roman world
tended to despise the poor, but Christians gave generously not only to their own

poor but to those of other faiths. In broader society, women had very low status,
being subjected to high levels of female infanticide, forced marriages, and lack
of economic equality. Christianity afforded women much greater security and
equality than had previously existed in the ancient classical world.30 During the
terrible urban plagues of the first two centuries, Christians cared for all the sick
and dying in the city, often at the cost of their lives.31
Why would such an exclusive belief system lead to behavior that was so
open to others? It was because Christians had within their belief system the
strongest possible resource for practicing sacrificial service, generosity, and
peace-making. At the very heart of their view of reality was a man who died for
his enemies, praying for their forgiveness. Reflection on this could only lead to a
radically different way of dealing with those who were different from them. It
meant they could not act in violence and oppression toward their opponents.
We cannot skip lightly over the fact that there have been injustices done by
the church in the name of Christ, yet who can deny that the force of Christians’
most fundamental beliefs can be a powerful impetus for peace-making in our
troubled world?

TWO

HOW COULD A GOOD GOD ALLOW SUFFERING?

“I just don’t believe the God of Christianity exists,” said Hillary, an undergrad
English major. “God allows terrible suffering in the world. So he might be either
all-powerful but not good enough to end evil and suffering, or else he might be
all-good but not powerful enough to end evil and suffering. Either way the allgood, all-powerful God of the Bible couldn’t exist.”1
“This isn’t a philosophical issue to me,” added Rob, Hillary’s boyfriend. “This is
personal. I won’t believe in a God who allows suffering, even if he, she, or it
exists. Maybe God exists. Maybe not. But if he does, he can’t be trusted.”

FOR many people it is not the exclusivity of Christianity that poses the biggest
problem, it is the presence of evil and suffering in the world. Some find unjust
suffering to be a philosophical problem, calling into question the very existence
of God. For others it is an intensely personal issue. They don’t care about the
abstract question of whether God exists or not—they refuse to trust or believe in
any God who allows history and life to proceed as it has.
In December 2004, a massive tsunami killed more than 250,000 people
around the rim of the Indian Ocean. Over the following weeks, newspapers and
magazines were full of letters and articles asking “Where was God?” One
reporter wrote: “If God is God, he’s not good. If God is good, he’s not God. You
can’t have it both ways, especially after the Indian Ocean catastrophe.”2 Despite
the confident assertion of the columnist, the effort to demonstrate that evil
disproves the existence of God “is now acknowledged on (almost) all sides to be
completely bankrupt.”3 Why?
Evil and Suffering Isn’t Evidence Against God

Philosopher J. L. Mackie makes this case against God in his book The Miracle of
Theism (Oxford, 1982). He states it this way: If a good and powerful God exists,
he would not allow pointless evil, but because there is much unjustifiable,
pointless evil in the world, the traditional good and powerful God could not
exist. Some other god or no god may exist, but not the traditional God.4 Many
other philosophers have identified a major flaw in this reasoning. Tucked away
within the assertion that the world is filled with pointless evil is a hidden
premise, namely, that if evil appears pointless to me, then it must be pointless.
This reasoning is, of course, fallacious. Just because you can’t see or
imagine a good reason why God might allow something to happen doesn’t mean
there can’t be one. Again we see lurking within supposedly hard-nosed
skepticism an enormous faith in one’s own cognitive faculties. If our minds can’t
plumb the depths of the universe for good answers to suffering, well, then, there
can’t be any! This is blind faith of a high order.
The fallacy at the heart of this argument has been illustrated by the “no-seeums” illustration of Alvin Plantinga. If you look into your pup tent for a St.
Bernard, and you don’t see one, it is reasonable to assume that there is no St.
Bernard in your tent. But if you look into your pup tent for a “no-see-um” (an
extremely small insect with a bite out of all proportion to its size) and you don’t
see any, it is not reasonable to assume they aren’t there. Because, after all, no
one can see ’em. Many assume that if there were good reasons for the existence
of evil, they would be accessible to our minds, more like St. Bernards than like
no-see-ums, but why should that be the case?5
This argument against God doesn’t hold up, not only to logic but also to
experience. As a pastor, I’ve often preached on the story of Joseph in Genesis.
Joseph was an arrogant young man who was hated by his brothers. In their anger
at him, they imprisoned him in a pit and then sold him into a life of slavery and
misery in Egypt. Doubtless Joseph prayed to God to help him escape, but no
help was forthcoming, and into slavery he went. Though he experienced years of
bondage and misery, Joseph’s character was refined and strengthened by his
trials. Eventually he rose up to become a prime minister of Egypt who saved
thousands of lives and even his own family from starvation. If God had not
allowed Joseph’s years of suffering, he never would have been such a powerful
agent for social justice and spiritual healing.
Whenever I preach on this text, I hear from many people who identify with

that narrative. Many people have to admit that most of what they really needed
for success in life came to them through their most difficult and painful
experiences. Some look back on an illness and recognize that it was an
irreplaceable season of personal and spiritual growth for them. I have survived a
bout with cancer and my wife has suffered with Crohn’s disease for years, and
we would both attest to this.
I knew a man in my first parish who had lost most of his eyesight after he
was shot in the face during a drug deal gone bad. He told me that he had been an
extremely selfish and cruel person, but he had always blamed his constant legal
and relational problems on others. The loss of his sight had devastated him, but it
had also profoundly humbled him. “As my physical eyes were closed, my
spiritual eyes were opened, as it were. I finally saw how I’d been treating people.
I changed, and now for the first time in my life I have friends, real friends. It was
a terrible price to pay, and yet I must say it was worth it. I finally have what
makes life worthwhile.”
Though none of these people are grateful for the tragedies themselves, they
would not trade the insight, character, and strength they had gotten from them
for anything. With time and perspective most of us can see good reasons for at
least some of the tragedy and pain that occurs in life. Why couldn’t it be possible
that, from God’s vantage point, there are good reasons for all of them?
If you have a God great and transcendent enough to be mad at because he
hasn’t stopped evil and suffering in the world, then you have (at the same
moment) a God great and transcendent enough to have good reasons for
allowing it to continue that you can’t know. Indeed, you can’t have it both ways.
Evil and Suffering May Be (If Anything)
Evidence for God
Horrendous, inexplicable suffering, though it cannot disprove God, is
nonetheless a problem for the believer in the Bible. However, it is perhaps an
even greater problem for nonbelievers. C. S. Lewis described how he had
originally rejected the idea of God because of the cruelty of life. Then he came
to realize that evil was even more problematic for his new atheism. In the end,
he realized that suffering provided a better argument for God’s existence than
one against it.

My argument against God was that the universe seemed so cruel and unjust. But
how had I got this idea of “just” and unjust”?…What was I comparing this
universe with when I called it unjust?…Of course I could have given up my idea
of justice by saying it was nothing but a private idea of my own. But if I did that,
then my argument against God collapsed too—for the argument depended on
saying that the world was really unjust, not simply that it did not happen to
please my private fancies…. Consequently atheism turns out to be too simple.6
Lewis recognized that modern objections to God are based on a sense of fair
play and justice. People, we believe, ought not to suffer, be excluded, die of
hunger or oppression. But the evolutionary mechanism of natural selection
depends on death, destruction, and violence of the strong against the weak—
these things are all perfectly natural. On what basis, then, does the atheist judge
the natural world to be horribly wrong, unfair, and unjust? The nonbeliever in
God doesn’t have a good basis for being outraged at injustice, which, as Lewis
points out, was the reason for objecting to God in the first place. If you are sure
that this natural world is unjust and filled with evil, you are assuming the reality
of some extra-natural (or supernatural) standard by which to make your
judgment. The philosopher Alvin Plantinga said it like this:
Could there really be any such thing as horrifying wickedness [if there were no
God and we just evolved]? I don’t see how. There can be such a thing only if
there is a way that rational creatures are supposed to live, obliged to live…. A
[secular] way of looking at the world has no place for genuine moral obligation
of any sort…and thus no way to say there is such a thing as genuine and
appalling wickedness. Accordingly, if you think there really is such a thing as
horrifying wickedness (…and not just an illusion of some sort), then you have a
powerful…argument for the reality of God].7
In short, the problem of tragedy, suffering, and injustice is a problem for
everyone. It is at least as big a problem for nonbelief in God as for belief. It is
therefore a mistake, though an understandable one, to think that if you abandon
belief in God it somehow makes the problem of evil easier to handle.
A WOMAN IN MY CHURCH once confronted me about sermon illustrations in which
evil events turned out for the good. She had lost a husband in an act of violence

during a robbery. She also had several children with severe mental and emotional
problems. She insisted that for every one story in which evil turns out for good
there are one hundred in which there is no conceivable silver lining. In the same
way, much of the discussion so far in this chapter may sound cold and irrelevant
to a real-life sufferer. “So what if suffering and evil doesn’t logically disprove
God?” such a person might say. “I’m still angry. All this philosophizing does not
get the Christian God ‘off the hook’ for the world’s evil and suffering!” In
response the philosopher Peter Kreeft points out that the Christian God came to
earth to deliberately put himself on the hook of human suffering. In Jesus Christ,
God experienced the greatest depths of pain. Therefore, though Christianity does
not provide the reason for each experience of pain, it provides deep resources for
actually facing suffering with hope and courage rather than bitterness and
despair.
Comparing Jesus to the Martyrs
The gospel narratives all show that Jesus did not face his approaching death with
anything like the aplomb and fearlessness that was widely expected in a spiritual
hero. The well-known Maccabean martyrs, who suffered under the Syrian rule of
Antiochus Epiphanes, were the paradigms for spiritual courage in the face of
persecution. They were famous for speaking defiantly and confidently of God
even as they were having limbs cut off. Contrast that with the demeanor of Jesus,
who is depicted as profoundly shaken by his impending doom. “…He began to
be deeply distressed and troubled” saying, “My soul is overwhelmed with
sorrow to the point of death” (Mark 14:33-34). Luke describes Jesus before his
death as being in “agony” and describes a man with all the signs of being in
physical shock (Luke 22:44). Matthew, Mark, and Luke all show Jesus trying to
avoid death, asking the Father if there isn’t some way out of it (“If it be your
will…take this cup from me”—Mark 14:36; Luke 22:42). Finally, on the cross
itself, Jesus does not, as the Maccabean martyrs, confidently call onlookers to be
faithful to God. Rather, he cries out that God has forsaken him (Matthew 27:46).
On the cross, Jesus suffered a three-hour-long death by slow suffocation and
blood loss. As terribly painful as that was, there have been far more excruciating
and horrible deaths that martyrs have faced with far greater confidence and
calmness. Two famous examples are Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley, who
were burned at the stake at Oxford in 1555 for their Protestant convictions. As
the flames leapt up, Latimer was heard to say calmly, “Be of good comfort, Mr.

Ridley, and play the man! We shall this day light such a candle by God’s grace,
in England, as I trust never shall be put out.”
Why was Jesus so much more overwhelmed by his death than others have
been, even more than his own followers?
The Suffering of God
To understand Jesus’s suffering at the end of the gospels, we must remember
how he is introduced at their beginning. The gospel writer John, in his first
chapter, introduces us to the mysterious but crucial concept of God as tripersonal. The Son of God was not created but took part in creation and has lived
throughout all eternity “in the bosom of the Father” (John 1:18)—that is, in a
relationship of absolute intimacy and love. But at the end of his life he was cut
off from the Father.
There may be no greater inner agony than the loss of a relationship we
desperately want. If a mild acquaintance turns on you, condemns and criticizes
you, and says she never wants to see you again, it is painful. If someone you’re
dating does the same thing, it is qualitatively more painful. But if your spouse
does this to you, or if one of your parents does this to you when you’re still a
child, the psychological damage is infinitely worse.
We cannot fathom, however, what it would be like to lose not just spousal
love or parental love that has lasted several years, but the infinite love of the
Father that Jesus had from all eternity. Jesus’s sufferings would have been
eternally unbearable. Christian theology has always recognized that Jesus bore,
as the substitute in our place, the endless exclusion from God that the human
race has merited. In the Garden of Gethsemane, even the beginning and foretaste
of this experience began to put Jesus into a state of shock. New Testament
scholar Bill Lane writes: “Jesus came to be with the Father for an interlude
before his betrayal, but found hell rather than heaven opened before him, and he
staggered.”8 On the cross, Jesus’s cry of dereliction—“My God, my God, why
have you forsaken me?”—is a deeply relational statement. Lane writes: “The cry
has a ruthless authenticity…Jesus did not die renouncing God. Even in the
inferno of abandonment he did not surrender his faith in God but expressed his
anguished prayer in a cry of affirmation, ‘My God, my God.’”9 Jesus still uses
the language of intimacy—“my God”—even as he experiences infinite

separation from the Father.
Redemption and Suffering
The death of Jesus was qualitatively different from any other death. The physical
pain was nothing compared to the spiritual experience of cosmic abandonment.10
Christianity alone among the world religions claims that God became uniquely
and fully human in Jesus Christ and therefore knows firsthand despair, rejection,
loneliness, poverty, bereavement, torture, and imprisonment. On the cross he
went beyond even the worst human suffering and experienced cosmic rejection
and pain that exceeds ours as infinitely as his knowledge and power exceeds
ours. In his death, God suffers in love, identifying with the abandoned and
godforsaken.11 Why did he do it? The Bible says that Jesus came on a rescue
mission for creation. He had to pay for our sins so that someday he can end evil
and suffering without ending us.
Let’s see where this has brought us. If we again ask the question: “Why does
God allow evil and suffering to continue?” and we look at the cross of Jesus, we
still do not know what the answer is. However, we now know what the answer
isn’t. It can’t be that he doesn’t love us. It can’t be that he is indifferent or
detached from our condition. God takes our misery and suffering so seriously
that he was willing to take it on himself. Albert Camus understood this when he
wrote:
[Christ] the god-man suffers too, with patience. Evil and death can no
longer be entirely imputed to him since he suffers and dies. The night on
Golgotha is so important in the history of man only because, in its shadows, the
divinity ostensibly abandoned its traditional privilege, and lived through to the
end, despair included, the agony of death. Thus is explained the “Lama
sabachthani” and the frightful doubt of Christ in agony.12
So, if we embrace the Christian teaching that Jesus is God and that he went
to the Cross, then we have deep consolation and strength to face the brutal
realities of life on earth. We can know that God is truly Immanuel—God with us
—even in our worst sufferings.

Resurrection and Suffering
I think we need something more than knowing God is with us in our difficulties.
We also need hope that our suffering is “not in vain.” Have you ever noticed how
desperate the families of lost loved ones are to say that? They work to reform
laws or change social conditions that led to the death. They need to believe that
the death of their loved ones has led to new life, that the injustice has led to
greater justice.
For the one who suffers, the Christian faith provides as a resource not just its
teaching on the Cross but also the fact of the resurrection. The Bible teaches that
the future is not an immaterial “paradise” but a new heaven and a new earth. In
Revelation 21, we do not see human beings being taken out of this world into
heaven, but rather heaven coming down and cleansing, renewing, and perfecting
this material world. The secular view of things, of course, sees no future
restoration after death or history. And Eastern religions believe we lose our
individuality and return to the great All-soul, so our material lives in this world
are gone forever. Even religions that believe in a heavenly paradise consider it a
consolation for the losses and pain of this life and all the joys that might have
been.
The Biblical view of things is resurrection—not a future that is just a
consolation for the life we never had but a restoration of the life you always
wanted. This means that every horrible thing that ever happened will not only be
undone and repaired but will in some way make the eventual glory and joy even
greater.
A few years ago I had a horrible nightmare in which I dreamed that everyone
in my family had died. When I awoke my relief was enormous—but there was
much more than just relief. My delight in each member of my family was
tremendously enriched. I looked at each one and realized how grateful I was for
them, how deeply I loved them. Why? My joy had been greatly magnified by the
nightmare. My delight upon awaking took the terror up into itself, as it were, so
that in the end my love for them was only greater for my having lost them and
found them again. This same dynamic is at work when you lose some possession
you take for granted. When you find it again (having thought it was gone
forever) you cherish and appreciate it in a far deeper way.
In Greek (specifically Stoic) philosophy there was a belief that history was

an endless cycle. Every so often the universe would wind down and burn up in a
great conflagration called a palengenesia, after which history, having been
purified, started over. But in Matthew 19:28 Jesus spoke of his return to earth as
the palingenesis. “I tell you the truth, at the renewal of all things (Greek
palingenesis), the Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne.” This was a
radically new concept. Jesus insisted that his return will be with such power that
the very material world and universe will be purged of all decay and brokenness.
All will be healed and all might-have-beens will be.
Just after the climax of the trilogy The Lord of the Rings, Sam Gamgee
discovers that his friend Gandalf was not dead (as he thought) but alive. He
cries, “I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was dead myself! Is
everything sad going to come untrue?”13 The answer of Christianity to that
question is—yes. Everything sad is going to come untrue and it will somehow be
greater for having once been broken and lost.
Embracing the Christian doctrines of the incarnation and Cross brings
profound consolation in the face of suffering. The doctrine of the resurrection
can instill us with a powerful hope. It promises that we will get the life we most
longed for, but it will be an infinitely more glorious world than if there had never
been the need for bravery, endurance, sacrifice, or salvation.14
Dostoevsky put it perfectly when he wrote:
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for, that all the
humiliating absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage,
like the despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidean
mind of man, that in the world’s finale, at the moment of eternal harmony,
something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts, for the
comforting of all resentments, for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity, of
all the blood that they’ve shed; that it will make it not only possible to forgive
but to justify all that has happened.15
More succinctly, C. S. Lewis wrote:
They say of some temporal suffering, “No future bliss can make up for it,” not
knowing that Heaven, once attained, will work backwards and turn even that

agony into a glory.16
This is the ultimate defeat of evil and suffering. It will not only be ended but
so radically vanquished that what has happened will only serve to make our
future life and joy infinitely greater.

THREE

CHRISTIANITY IS A STRAITJACKET

“Christians believe that they have the absolute truth that everyone else has to
believe—or else,” said Keith, a young artist living in Brooklyn. “That attitude
endangers everyone’s freedom.”
“Yes,” agreed Chloe, another young artist. “A ‘one-Truth-fits all’ approach is
just too confining. The Christians I know don’t seem to have the freedom to think
for themselves. I believe each individual must determine truth for him-or
herself.”

IS a belief in absolute truth the enemy of freedom? Most people I’ve met in
New York City believe that it is. Christianity names some beliefs “heresy” and
some practices “immoral.” It bars from its community those who transgress its
doctrinal and moral boundaries. This seems to contemporary observers to
endanger civic freedom, because it divides rather than unites our population. It
also appears to be culturally narrow, failing to recognize that various cultures
have different perspectives on reality. Finally, it seems to enslave or at least
infantilize its members, determining what they must believe and practice in
every particular. M. Scott Peck told of counseling a woman named Charlene who
said about Christianity: “There’s no room for me in that. That would be my
death!…I don’t want to live for God. I will not. I want to live for…my own
sake.”1 Charlene believed Christianity would stifle her creativity and growth. So
did early-twentieth-century social activist Emma Goldman, who called
Christianity “the leveler of the human race, the breaker of man’s will to dare and
to do…an iron net, a straitjacket which does not let him expand or grow.”2
At the end of the movie I, Robot (2004), the robot named Sonny has fulfilled
the objectives in his design program. But now he realizes he no longer has a
purpose. The movie concludes with a dialogue between Sonny and the other

main character, Detective Spooner.
Sonny: Now that I have fulfilled my purpose, I don’t know what to do.
Detective Spooner: I guess you’ll have to find your way like the rest of us,
Sonny…That’s what it means to be free.
In this view, “freedom” means that there is no overarching purpose for
which we were created. If there were, we would be obligated to conform to it
and to fulfill it, and that is limiting. True freedom is freedom to create your own
meaning and purpose. The Supreme Court has enshrined this view in law when it
opined “the heart of liberty” is to “define one’s own concept of existence, of the
meaning of the universe.”3 Stephen Jay Gould concurs:
We are here because one odd group of fishes had a peculiar fin anatomy that
could transform into legs for terrestrial creatures; because comets struck the
earth and wiped out dinosaurs, thereby giving mammals a chance not otherwise
available…. We may yearn for a “higher” answer—but none exists. This
explanation, though superficially troubling, if not terrifying, is ultimately
liberating and exhilarating. We cannot read the meaning of life passively in the
facts of nature. We must construct these answers for ourselves…4
Christianity looks like an enemy of social cohesion, cultural adaptability, and
even authentic personhood. However, this objection is based on mistakes about
the nature of truth, community, Christianity, and of liberty itself.
Truth Is Unavoidable
The French philosopher Foucault writes: “Truth is a thing of this world. It is
produced only by multiple forms of constraint and that includes the regular
effects of power.”5 Inspired by Foucault, many say that all truth-claims are
power plays. When you claim to have the truth, you are trying to get power and
control over other people. Foucault was a disciple of Nietzsche, and to their
credit they used this analysis on both the Left and the Right. If you claimed
“everyone should do justice to the poor” in front of Nietzsche, he would question
whether you said that because you really loved justice and the poor or because

you wanted to start a revolution that would give you control and power.
However, the objection that all truth is a power play falls prey to the same
problem as the objection that all truth is culturally conditioned. If you try to
explain away all assertions of truth as one or the other or something else you
find yourself in an untenable position. C. S. Lewis writes in The Abolition of
Man:
But you cannot go on “explaining away” for ever: you will find that you have
explained explanation itself away. You cannot go on “seeing through” things for
ever. The whole point of seeing through something is to see something through it.
It is good that the window should be transparent, because the street or garden
beyond it is opaque. How if you saw through the garden too?…a wholly
transparent world is an invisible world. To “see through” all things is the same
as not to see.6
If you say all truth-claims are power plays, then so is your statement. If you
say (like Freud) that all truth-claims about religion and God are just
psychological projections to deal with your guilt and insecurity, then so is your
statement. To see through everything is not to see.
Foucault was pressing the truth of his analysis on others even as he denied
the very category of truth. Some kind of truth-claim, then, seems unavoidable.
The inconsistency of working against oppression when you refuse to admit there
is such a thing as truth is the reason that postmodern “theory” and
“deconstruction” is perhaps on the wane.7 G. K. Chesterton made this very same
point nearly a hundred years ago:
The new rebel is a skeptic, and will not trust anything…[but] therefore he can
never be really a revolutionary. For all denunciation implies a moral doctrine of
some kind…. Therefore the modern man in revolt has become practically useless
for all purposes of revolt. By rebelling against everything he has lost his right to
rebel against anything…. There is a thought that stops thought. That is the only
thought that ought to be stopped.8
Community Can’t Be Completely Inclusive

Christianity requires particular beliefs in order to be a member of its community.
It is not open to all. This is socially divisive, critics argue. Human communities
should instead be completely inclusive, open to all on the basis of our common
humanity. Proponents of this view point out that many urban neighborhoods
contain residents of different races and religious beliefs who nonetheless live and
work together as a community. All that is required for such community life is
that each person respects the privacy and rights of others and works for equal
access to education, jobs, and political decision-making for all. Common moral
beliefs are not necessary, it is said, in a “liberal democracy.”
Unfortunately, the view just expressed is a vast oversimplification. Liberal
democracy is based on an extensive list of assumptions—a preference of
individual to community rights, a division between private and public morality,
and the sanctity of personal choice. All of these beliefs are foreign to many other
cultures.9 A liberal democracy is based then (as is every community) on a shared
set of very particular beliefs. Western society is based on shared commitments to
reason, rights, and justice, even though there is no universally recognized
definition of any of these.10 Every account of justice and reason is embedded in
a set of some particular beliefs about the meaning of human life that is not
shared with everyone.11 The idea of a totally inclusive community is, therefore,
an illusion.12 Every human community holds in common some beliefs that
necessarily create boundaries, including some people and excluding others from
its circle.
Consider an illustration. Imagine that one of the board members of the local
Gay, Lesbian, and Transgender Community Center announces, “I’ve had a
religious experience and now I believe homosexuality is a sin.” As the weeks go
by, he persists in making that assertion. Imagine that a board member of the
Alliance Against Same-Sex Marriage announces, “I discovered that my son is
gay and I think he has the right to marry his partner.” No matter how personally
gracious and flexible the members of each group are, the day will come when
each group will have to say, “You must step off the board because you don’t
share a common commitment with us.” The first of these communities has the
reputation for being inclusive and the second for being exclusive, but, in
practice, both of them operate in almost the very same way. Each is based on
common beliefs that act as boundaries, including some and excluding others.
Neither community is being “narrow”—they are just being communities.
Any community that did not hold its members accountable for specific

beliefs and practices would have no corporate identity and would not really be a
community at all.13 We cannot consider a group exclusive simply because it has
standards for its members. Is there then no way to judge whether a community is
open and caring rather than narrow and oppressive? Yes, there is. Here is a far
better set of tests: Which community has beliefs that lead its members to treat
persons in other communities with love and respect—to serve them and meet
their needs? Which community’s beliefs lead it to demonize and attack those
who violate their boundaries rather than treating them with kindness, humility,
and winsomeness? We should criticize Christians when they are condemning and
ungracious to unbelievers.14 But we should not criticize churches when they
maintain standards for membership in accord with their beliefs. Every
community must do the same.
Christianity Isn’t Culturally Rigid
Christianity is also reputed to be a cultural straitjacket. It allegedly forces people
from diverse cultures into a single iron mold. It is seen as an enemy of pluralism
and multiculturalism. In reality, Christianity has been more adaptive (and maybe
less destructive) of diverse cultures than secularism and many other worldviews.
The pattern of Christian expansion differs from that of every other world
religion. The center and majority of Islam’s population is still in the place of its
origin—the Middle East. The original lands that have been the demographic
centers of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism have remained so. By
contrast, Christianity was first dominated by Jews and centered in Jerusalem.
Later it was dominated by Hellenists and centered in the Mediterranean. Later
the faith was received by the barbarians of Northern Europe and Christianity
came to be dominated by western Europeans and then North Americans. Today
most Christians in the world live in Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Christianity
soon will be centered in the southern and eastern hemispheres.
Two case studies are instructive. In 1900, Christians comprised 9 percent of
the African population and were outnumbered by Muslims four to one. Today,
Christians comprise 44 percent of the population,15 and in the 1960s passed
Muslims in number.16 This explosive growth is now beginning in China.17
Christianity is growing not only among the peasantry, but also among the social
and cultural establishment, including the Communist party. At the current rate of
growth, within thirty years Christians will constitute 30 percent of the Chinese

population of 1.5 billion.18
Why has Christianity grown so explosively in these places? African scholar
Lamin Sanneh gives a most intriguing answer. Africans, he said, had a long
tradition of belief in a supernatural world of good and evil spirits. When
Africans began to read the Bible in their own languages many began to see in
Christ the final solution to their own historic longings and aspirations as
Africans.19 Sanneh writes:
Christianity answered this historical challenge by a reorientation of the
worldview…. People sensed in their hearts that Jesus did not mock their respect
for the sacred nor their clamor for an invincible Savior, and so they beat their
sacred drums for him until the stars skipped and danced in the skies. After that
dance the stars weren’t little anymore. Christianity helped Africans to become
renewed Africans, not re-made Europeans.20
Sanneh argues that secularism with its anti-supernaturalism and
individualism is much more destructive of local cultures and “African-ness” than
Christianity is. In the Bible, Africans read of Jesus’s power over supernatural
and spiritual evil and of his triumph over it on the cross. When Africans become
Christians, their African-ness is converted, completed, and resolved, not
replaced with European-ness or something else.21 Through Christianity, Africans
get distance enough to critique their traditions yet still inhabit them.22
An interesting example of cultural adaptation is my own congregation,
Redeemer Presbyterian Church of Manhattan. Its growth in this environment has
surprised, even shocked observers. I am repeatedly asked, “How are you
reaching thousands of young adults in such a secular place?” The answer is that
Christianity has done in New York City what it has done in all the other places
that it has grown. It has adapted significantly and positively to the surrounding
culture without compromising its main tenets.
Redeemer’s basic doctrines—the deity of Christ, the infallibility of the
Bible, the necessity of spiritual rebirth through faith in Christ’s atoning death—
are in unity with the orthodox, supernaturalist beliefs of the evangelical and
Pentecostal churches of Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the U.S. South and
Midwest. These beliefs often put us in conflict with views and practices of many
people in the city. At the same time, we have been delighted to embrace many

other aspects of urban, pluralistic culture. We emphasize the arts, value racial
diversity, stress the importance of working for justice in the city for all its
inhabitants, and communicate in the language and with the sensibility of our
city-center culture. Most of all we stress the grace of a Savior who ate with
people the establishment called “sinners” and loved those who opposed him. All
of these things are very important to Manhattan residents.
As a result, Redeemer attracts and reaches a very diverse, urban
congregation. At one Redeemer Sunday service my wife, Kathy, was introduced
to a man sitting in front of her, brought to church by John DeLorean. He was a
speechwriter for a conservative Republican presidential candidate. Shortly
thereafter she was tapped on the shoulder by a woman sitting behind her who
wanted to introduce another guest. She had brought to church a man who was
Madonna’s chief songwriter at the time. Kathy was delighted they were both
there, but she hoped they wouldn’t meet each other before they had heard the
sermon!
Some years ago a man from a southern U.S. state visited Redeemer. He had
heard that though we held to orthodox Christian doctrine, we had grown large in
the midst of a skeptical, secular city. He expected to find that we were attracting
people with avant-garde music, video monitors and clips, dramatic sketches,
exceptionally hip settings, and other kinds of eye-catching spectacle. To his
surprise he found a simple and traditional service that, on the surface, seemed
identical to those in his more conservative part of the world. Yet he could also
see that the audience contained many people who wouldn’t have ever attended
the churches he knew. After the service he met me and then said, “This is a
complete mystery to me. Where are the dancing bears? Where are the gimmicks?
Why are these people here?”
I directed him to some “downtown art-types” who had been coming to
Redeemer for some time. They suggested that he look beneath the surface. One
person said that the difference between Redeemer and other churches was
profound, and lay in “irony, charity, and humility.” They said Redeemer lacked
the pompous and highly sentimental language they found emotionally
manipulative in other churches. Instead, Redeemer people addressed others with
gentle, self-deprecating irony. Not only that, but beliefs were held here in charity
and with humility, making Manhattanites feel included and welcomed, even if
they disagreed with some of Redeemer’s beliefs. Most of all, they said, teaching
and communication at Redeemer was intelligent and nuanced, showing

sensitivity where they were sensitive.
All of these emphases meet with approval in Manhattan, but each one is
grounded in historic Christian doctrine. For example, the emphasis on racial
diversity comes right out of St. Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, chapter 2, in which
Paul claims that the racial diversity of the church is an important witness to the
truth of the Christian message. To take another example, Reinhold Niebuhr has
pointed out that irony, amusement at seeing human beings try but fail to be
Godlike, is a very Christian way of looking at things.23 Because all these
adaptive emphases have deep roots in historic Christian teaching, they are not
simply marketing techniques.
Why has Christianity, more than any other major religion of the world, been
able to infiltrate so many radically different cultures? There is, of course, a core
of teachings (the Apostle’s Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, the Ten Commandments) to
which all forms of Christianity are committed. Nevertheless, there is a great deal
of freedom in how these absolutes are expressed and take form within a
particular culture. For example, the Bible directs Christians to unite in acts of
musical praise, but it doesn’t prescribe the meter, rhythm, level of emotional
expressiveness, or instrumentation—all this is left to be culturally expressed in a
variety of ways. Historian Andrew Walls writes:
Cultural diversity was built into the Christian faith…in Acts 15, which declared
that the new gentile Christians didn’t have to enter Jewish culture…. The
converts had to work out…a Hellenistic way of being a Christian. [So] no one
owns the Christian faith. There is no “Christian culture” the way there is an
“Islamic culture” which you can recognize from Pakistan to Tunisia to
Morocco….24
Biblical texts such as Isaiah 60 and Revelation 21-22 depict a renewed,
perfect, future world in which we retain our cultural differences (“every tongue,
tribe, people, nation” ). This means every human culture has (from God) distinct
goods and strengths for the enrichment of the human race. As Walls indicates,
while every culture has distortions and elements that will be critiqued and
revised by the Christian message, each culture will also have good and unique
elements to which Christianity connects and adapts.
Contrary to popular opinion, then, Christianity is not a Western religion that

destroys local cultures. Rather, Christianity has taken more culturally diverse
forms than other faiths.25 It has deep layers of insight from the Hebrew, Greek,
and European cultures, and over the next hundred years will be further shaped by
Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Christianity may become the most truly
“catholic vision of the world,”26 having opened its leadership over the centuries
to people from every tongue, tribe, people and nation.
Freedom Isn’t Simple
Christianity is supposedly a limit to personal growth and potential because it
constrains our freedom to choose our own beliefs and practices. Immanuel Kant
defined an enlightened human being as one who trusts in his or her own power
of thinking, rather than in authority or tradition.27 This resistance to authority in
moral matters is now a deep current in our culture. Freedom to determine our
own moral standards is considered a necessity for being fully human.
This oversimplifies, however. Freedom cannot be defined in strictly negative
terms, as the absence of confinement and constraint. In fact, in many cases,
confinement and constraint is actually a means to liberation.
If you have musical aptitude, you may give yourself to practice, practice,
practice the piano for years. This is a restriction, a limit on your freedom. There
are many other things you won’t be able to do with the time you invest in
practicing. If you have the talent, however, the discipline and limitation will
unleash your ability that would otherwise go untapped. What have you done?
You’ve deliberately lost your freedom to engage in some things in order to
release yourself to a richer kind of freedom to accomplish other things.
This does not mean that restriction, discipline, and constraint are
intrinsically, automatically liberating. For example, a five-foot-four, 125-pound
young adult male should not set his heart on becoming an NFL lineman. All the
discipline and effort in the world will only frustrate and crush him (literally). He
is banging his head against a physical reality—he simply does not have the
potential. In our society many people have worked extremely hard to pursue
careers that pay well rather than fit their talents and interests. Such careers are
straitjackets that in the long run stifle and dehumanize us.
Disciplines and constraints, then, liberate us only when they fit with the

reality of our nature and capacities. A fish, because it absorbs oxygen from water
rather than air, is only free if it is restricted and limited to water. If we put it out
on the grass, its freedom to move and even live is not enhanced, but destroyed.
The fish dies if we do not honor the reality of its nature.
In many areas of life, freedom is not so much the absence of restrictions as
finding the right ones, the liberating restrictions. Those that fit with the reality of
our nature and the world produce greater power and scope for our abilities and a
deeper joy and fulfillment. Experimentation, risk, and making mistakes bring
growth only if, over time, they show us our limits as well as our abilities. If we
only grow intellectually, vocationally, and physically through judicious
constraints—why would it not also be true for spiritual and moral growth?
Instead of insisting on freedom to create spiritual reality, shouldn’t we be
seeking to discover it and disciplining ourselves to live according to it?
The popular concept—that we should each determine our own morality—is
based on the belief that the spiritual realm is nothing at all like the rest of the
world. Does anyone really believe that? For many years after each of the
morning and evening Sunday services I remained in the auditorium for another
hour to field questions. Hundreds of people stayed for the give-and-take
discussions. One of the most frequent statements I heard was that “Every person
has to define right and wrong for him-or herself.” I always responded to the
speakers by asking, “Is there anyone in the world right now doing things you
believe they should stop doing no matter what they personally believe about the
correctness of their behavior?” They would invariably say, “Yes, of course.”
Then I would ask, “Doesn’t that mean that you do believe there is some kind of
moral reality that is ‘there’ that is not defined by us, that must be abided by
regardless of what a person feels or thinks?” Almost always, the response to that
question was a silence, either a thoughtful or a grumpy one.
Love, the Ultimate Freedom, Is More Constraining Than We Might Think
What then is the moral-spiritual reality we must acknowledge to thrive? What is
the environment that liberates us if we confine ourselves to it, like water
liberates the fish? Love. Love is the most liberating freedom-loss of all.
One of the principles of love—either love for a friend or romantic love—is
that you have to lose independence to attain greater intimacy. If you want the

“freedoms” of love—the fulfillment, security, sense of worth that it brings—you
must limit your freedom in many ways. You cannot enter a deep relationship and
still make unilateral decisions or allow your friend or lover no say in how you
live your life. To experience the joy and freedom of love, you must give up your
personal autonomy. The French novelist Françoise Sagan expressed this well in
an interview in Le Monde. She expressed that she was satisfied with the way she
had lived her life and had no regrets:
Interviewer: Then you have had the freedom you wanted?
Sagan: Yes…I was obviously less free when I was in love with someone…. But
one’s not in love all the time. Apart from that…I’m free.28
Sagan is right. A love relationship limits your personal options. Again we are
confronted with the complexity of the concept of “freedom.” Human beings are
most free and alive in relationships of love. We only become ourselves in love,
and yet healthy love relationships involve mutual, unselfish service, a mutual
loss of independence. C. S. Lewis put it eloquently:
Love anything, and your heart will certainly be wrung and possibly broken. If
you want to make sure of keeping it intact, you must give your heart to no one,
not even to an animal. Wrap it carefully round with hobbies and little luxuries;
avoid all entanglements; lock it up safe in the casket or coffin of your
selfishness. But in that casket—safe, dark, motionless, airless—it will change. It
will not be broken; it will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The
alternative to tragedy, or at least to the risk of tragedy, is damnation.29
Freedom, then, is not the absence of limitations and constraints but it is
finding the right ones, those that fit our nature and liberate us.
For a love relationship to be healthy there must be a mutual loss of
independence. It can’t be just one way. Both sides must say to the other, “I will
adjust to you. I will change for you. I’ll serve you even though it means a
sacrifice for me.” If only one party does all the sacrificing and giving, and the
other does all the ordering and taking, the relationship will be exploitative and
will oppress and distort the lives of both people.

At first sight, then, a relationship with God seems inherently dehumanizing.
Surely it will have to be “one way,” God’s way. God, the divine being, has all the
power. I must adjust to God—there is no way that God could adjust to and serve
me.
While this may be true in other forms of religion and belief in God, it is not
true in Christianity. In the most radical way, God has adjusted to us—in his
incarnation and atonement. In Jesus Christ he became a limited human being,
vulnerable to suffering and death. On the cross, he submitted to our condition—
as sinners—and died in our place to forgive us. In the most profound way, God
has said to us, in Christ, “I will adjust to you. I will change for you. I’ll serve
you though it means a sacrifice for me.” If he has done this for us, we can and
should say the same to God and others. St. Paul writes, “the love of Christ
constrains us” (2 Corinthians 5:14).
A friend of C. S. Lewis’s was once asked, “Is it easy to love God?” and he
replied, “It is easy to those who do it.”30 That is not as paradoxical as it sounds.
When you fall deeply in love, you want to please the beloved. You don’t wait for
the person to ask you to do something for her. You eagerly research and learn
every little thing that brings her pleasure. Then you get it for her, even if it costs
you money or great inconvenience. “Your wish is my command,” you feel—and
it doesn’t feel oppressive at all. From the outside, bemused friends may think,
“She’s leading him around by the nose,” but from the inside it feels like heaven.
For a Christian, it’s the same with Jesus. The love of Christ constrains. Once
you realize how Jesus changed for you and gave himself for you, you aren’t
afraid of giving up your freedom and therefore finding your freedom in him.

FOUR

THE CHURCH IS RESPONSIBLE FOR SO MUCH INJUSTICE

“I have to doubt any religion that has so many fanatics and hypocrites,” insisted
Helen, a law student. “There are so many people who are not religious at all
who are more kind and even more moral than many of the Christians I know.”
“The church has a history of supporting injustice, of destroying culture,”
responded Jessica, another law student. “If Christianity is the true religion, how
could this be?”

MARK Lilla, a professor at the University of Chicago, wrote an account for
The New York Times Magazine of his “born again” experience as a teenager.
During college he “de-converted” and abandoned his Christian faith. How did it
happen? Moving from Detroit to Ann Arbor, Michigan, he entered a Christian
community that had a national reputation for spiritual vitality, but it turned out to
be a “crushing disappointment.” The community was authoritarian and
hierarchical, and the members were “dogmatic…eager to bring me into line
doctrinally.” Disillusioned by the combative and exploitative way he thought
they used the Bible to control people’s lives, “the thought penetrated my mind—
that the Bible might be wrong…. It was my first step out of the world of
faith…”1
Many people who take an intellectual stand against Christianity do so
against a background of personal disappointment with Christians and churches.
We all bring to issues intellectual predispositions based on our experiences. If
you have known many wise, loving, kind, and insightful Christians over the
years, and if you have seen churches that are devout in belief yet civic-minded
and generous, you will find the intellectual case for Christianity much more
plausible. If, on the other hand, the preponderance of your experience is with
nominal Christians (who bear the name but don’t practice it) or with self-

righteous fanatics, then the arguments for Christianity will have to be extremely
strong for you to concede that they have any cogency at all. Mark Lilla’s
determination that “the Bible might be wrong” was not a pure act of
philosophical reflection. He was resisting the way that a particular person, in the
name of Christianity, was trying to exercise power over him.
So we have to address the behavior of Christians—individual and corporate
—that has undermined the plausibility of Christianity for so many people. Three
issues stand out. First, there is the issue of Christians’ glaring character flaws. If
Christianity is the truth, why are so many non-Christians living better lives than
the Christians? Second, there is the issue of war and violence. If Christianity is
the truth, why has the institutional church supported war, injustice, and violence
over the years? Third, there is the issue of fanaticism. Even if Christian teaching
has much to offer, why would we want to be together with so many smug, selfrighteous, dangerous fanatics?
Character Flaws
Anyone involved in the life of a church will soon discover the many flaws in the
character of the average professing Christian. Church communities seem, if
anything, to be characterized by more fighting and party spirit than do other
voluntary organizations. Also, the moral failings of Christian leaders are well
known. It may be true that the press takes too much pleasure in publicizing them,
but it doesn’t create them. Church officials seem to be at least (if not more)
corrupt than leaders in the world at large.
At the same time there are many formally irreligious people who live
morally exemplary lives. If Christianity is all it claims to be, shouldn’t Christians
on the whole be much better people than everyone else?
This assumption is based on a mistaken belief concerning what Christianity
actually teaches about itself. Christian theology has taught what is known as
common grace. James 1:17 says, “Every good and perfect gift comes down from
above…from the father of lights.” This means that no matter who performs it,
every act of goodness, wisdom, justice, and beauty is empowered by God. God
gives out good gifts of wisdom, talent, beauty, and skill “graciously”—that is, in
a completely unmerited way. He casts them across all humanity, regardless of
religious conviction, race, gender, or any other attribute to enrich, brighten, and

preserve the world.
Christian theology also speaks of the seriously flawed character of real
Christians. A central message of the Bible is that we can only have a relationship
with God by sheer grace. Our moral efforts are too feeble and falsely motivated
to ever merit salvation. Jesus, through his death and resurrection, has provided
salvation for us, which we receive as a gift. All churches believe this in one form
or another. Growth in character and changes in behavior occur in a gradual
process after a person becomes a Christian. The mistaken belief that a person
must “clean up” his or her own life in order to merit God’s presence is not
Christianity. This means, though, that the church will be filled with immature
and broken people who still have a long way to go emotionally, morally, and
spiritually. As the saying has it: “The church is a hospital for sinners, not a
museum for saints.”
Good character is largely attributable to a loving, safe, and stable family and
social environment—conditions for which we were not responsible. Many have
had instead an unstable family background, poor role models, and a history of
tragedy and disappointment. As a result, they are burdened with deep
insecurities, hypersensitivity, and a lack of self-confidence. They may struggle
with uncontrolled anger, shyness, addictions, and other difficulties as a result.
Now imagine that someone with a very broken past becomes a Christian and
her character improves significantly over what it was. Nevertheless, she still may
be less secure and self-disciplined than someone who is so well adjusted that she
feels no particular need for religious affiliation at all. Suppose you meet both of
these women the same week. Unless you know the starting points and life
journeys of each woman, you could easily conclude that Christianity isn’t worth
much, and that Christians are inconsistent with their own high standards. It is
often the case that people whose lives have been harder and who are “lower on
the character scale” are more likely to recognize their need for God and turn to
Christianity. So we should expect that many Christians’ lives would not compare
well to those of the nonreligious2 ( just as the health of people in the hospital is
comparatively worse than people visiting museums).
Religion and Violence
Doesn’t orthodox religion lead inevitably to violence? Christopher Hitchens, the

author of God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything, argues that it
does. In his chapter “Religion Kills,” he gives personal accounts of religionfueled violence in Belfast, Beirut, Bombay, Belgrade, Bethlehem, and Baghdad.
His argument is that religion takes racial and cultural differences and aggravates
them. “Religion is not unlike racism,” he writes. “One version of it inspires and
provokes the other. Religion has been an enormous multiplier of tribal suspicion
and hatred….”3
Hitchens’s point is fair. Religion “transcendentalizes” ordinary cultural
differences so that parties feel they are in a cosmic battle between good and evil.
This is why Hitchens argues that “religion poisons everything.” So it would
seem. Christian nations institutionalized imperialism, violence, and oppression
through the Inquisition and the African slave trade. The totalitarian and
militaristic Japanese empire of the mid-twentieth century grew out of a culture
deeply influenced by Buddhism and Shintoism. Islam is the soil for much of
today’s terrorism, while Israeli forces have often been ruthless too. Hindu
nationalists, in the name of their religion, carry out bloody strikes on both
Christian churches and Muslim mosques. All of this evidence seems to indicate
that religion aggravates human differences until they boil over into war,
violence, and the oppression of minorities.4
There are problems with this view, however. The Communist Russian,
Chinese, and Cambodian regimes of the twentieth century rejected all organized
religion and belief in God. A forerunner of all these was the French Revolution,
which rejected traditional religion for human reason. These societies were all
rational and secular, yet each produced massive violence against its own people
without the influence of religion. Why? Alister McGrath points out that when
the idea of God is gone, a society will “transcendentalize” something else, some
other concept, in order to appear morally and spiritually superior. The Marxists
made the State into such an absolute, while the Nazis did it to race and blood.
Even the ideals of liberty and equality can be used in this way in order to do
violence to opponents. In 1793, when Madame Roland went to the guillotine on
trumped-up charges, she bowed to the statue personifying liberty in the Place de
la Révolution and said, “Liberty, what crimes are committed in your name.”5
Violence done in the name of Christianity is a terrible reality and must be
both addressed and redressed. There is no excusing it. In the twentieth century,
however, violence has been inspired as much by secularism as by moral
absolutism. Societies that have rid themselves of all religion have been just as

oppressive as those steeped in it. We can only conclude that there is some violent
impulse so deeply rooted in the human heart that it expresses itself regardless of
what the beliefs of a particular society might be—whether socialist or capitalist,
whether religious or irreligious, whether individualistic or hierarchical.
Ultimately, then, the fact of violence and warfare in a society is no necessary
refutation of the prevailing beliefs of that society.
Fanaticism
Perhaps the biggest deterrent to Christianity for the average person today is not
so much violence and warfare but the shadow of fanaticism. Many nonbelievers
have friends or relatives who have become “born again” and seem to have gone
off the deep end. They soon begin to express loudly their disapproval of various
groups and sectors of our society—especially movies and television, the
Democratic party, homosexuals, evolutionists, activist judges, members of other
religions, and the values taught in public schools. When arguing for the truth of
their faith they often appear intolerant and self-righteous. This is what many
people would call fanaticism.
Many people try to understand Christians along a spectrum from
“nominalism” at one end to “fanaticism” on the other. A nominal Christian is
someone who is Christian in name only, who does not practice it and perhaps
barely believes it. A fanatic is someone who is thought to over-believe and overpractice Christianity. In this schematic, the best kind of Christian would be
someone in the middle, someone who doesn’t go all the way with it, who
believes it but is not too devoted to it. The problem with this approach is that it
assumes that the Christian faith is a basically a form of moral improvement.
Intense Christians would therefore be intense moralists or, as they were called in
Jesus’s time, Pharisees. Pharisaic people assume they are right with God because
of their moral behavior and right doctrine. This leads naturally to feelings of
superiority toward those who do not share their religiosity, and from there to
various forms of abuse, exclusion, and oppression. This is the essence of what
we think of as fanaticism.
What if, however, the essence of Christianity is salvation by grace, salvation
not because of what we do but because of what Christ has done for us? Belief
that you are accepted by God by sheer grace is profoundly humbling. The people
who are fanatics, then, are so not because they are too committed to the gospel

but because they’re not committed to it enough.
Think of people you consider fanatical. They’re overbearing, self-righteous,
opinionated, insensitive, and harsh. Why? It’s not because they are too Christian
but because they are not Christian enough. They are fanatically zealous and
courageous, but they are not fanatically humble, sensitive, loving, empathetic,
forgiving, or understanding—as Christ was. Because they think of Christianity
as a self-improvement program they emulate the Jesus of the whips in the
temple, but not the Jesus who said, “Let him who is without sin cast the first
stone” (John 8:7). What strikes us as overly fanatical is actually a failure to be
fully committed to Christ and his gospel.
The Biblical Critique of Religion
Extremism and fanaticism, which lead to injustice and oppression, are a constant
danger within any body of religious believers. For Christians, however, the
antidote is not to tone down and moderate their faith, but rather to grasp a fuller
and truer faith in Christ. The Biblical prophets understood this well. In fact, the
scholar Merold Westphal documents how Marx’s analysis of religion as an
instrument of oppression was anticipated by the Hebrew prophets Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Amos, and even by the message of the New Testament gospels. Marx,
according to Westphal, was unoriginal in his critique of religion—the Bible beat
him to it!6
Jesus conducts a major critique of religion. His famous Sermon on the
Mount (Matthew chapters 5, 6, and 7) does not criticize irreligious people, but
rather religious ones. In his famous discourse the people he criticizes pray, give
to the poor, and seek to live according to the Bible, but they do so in order to get
acclaim and power for themselves. They believe they will get leverage over
others and even over God because of their spiritual performance (“They think
they will be heard for their many words”—Matthew 6:7). This makes them
judgmental and condemning, quick to give criticism, and unwilling to take it.
They are fanatics.
In his teaching, Jesus continually says to the respectable and upright, “The
tax collectors and the prostitutes enter the kingdom before you” (Matthew
21:31). He continuously condemns in white-hot language their legalism, selfrighteousness, bigotry, and love of wealth and power (“You clean the outside of

the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness…. You neglect
justice and the love of God…You load people down with burdens they can
hardly carry, and you yourselves will not lift one finger to help them…. [You]
devour widows’ houses and for a show make long prayers”—Luke 11:39-46;
20:47). We should not be surprised to discover it was the Bible-believing
religious establishment who put Jesus to death. As Swiss theologian Karl Barth
put it, it was the church, not the world, who crucified Christ.7
Jesus followed the lead of the Hebrew prophets such as Isaiah, who said to
the people of his day:
Day after day they seek me out; they seem eager to know my ways, as if they
were a nation that does what is right and has not forsaken the commands of its
God. They seem eager for God to come near them. “Why have we fasted,” they
say, “and you have not seen it? Why have we humbled ourselves, and you have
not noticed?” Yet on the day of your fasting, you do as you please and exploit all
your workers…. Is not this the kind of fasting I have chosen: to loose the chains
of injustice…to set the oppressed free and break every yoke? Is it not to share
your food with the hungry and to provide the poor wanderer with shelter—when
you see the naked, to clothe him…? (Isaiah 58:2-7)
What were the prophets and Jesus criticizing? They were not against prayer
and fasting and obedience to Biblical directions for life. The tendency of
religious people, however, is to use spiritual and ethical observance as a lever to
gain power over others and over God, appeasing him through ritual and good
works. This leads to both an emphasis on external religious forms as well as
greed, materialism, and oppression in social arrangements. Those who believe
they have pleased God by the quality of their devotion and moral goodness
naturally feel that they and their group deserve deference and power over others.
The God of Jesus and the prophets, however, saves completely by grace. He
cannot be manipulated by religious and moral performance—he can only be
reached through repentance, through the giving up of power. If we are saved by
sheer grace we can only become grateful, willing servants of God and of
everyone around us. Jesus charged his disciples: Whoever wants to be great
among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be servant
of all” (Mark 10:43-45).
In Jesus’s and the prophets’ critique, self-righteous religion is always marked

by insensitivity to issues of social justice, while true faith is marked by profound
concern for the poor and marginalized. The Swiss theologian John Calvin, in his
commentaries on the Hebrew prophets, says that God so identifies with the poor
that their cries express divine pain. The Bible teaches us that our treatment of
them equals our treatment of God.8
While the church has inexcusably been party to the oppression of people at
times, it is important to realize that the Bible gives us tools for analysis and
unflinching critique of religiously supported injustice from within the faith.
Historian C. John Sommerville claims that even strong secular critics of
Christianity are really using resources from within it to denounce it.9 Many
criticize the church for being power-hungry and self-regarding, but there are
many cultures in which the drive for power and respect is considered a good.
Where, then, did we get this list of virtues by which we can discern the church’s
sins, asks Sommerville? We actually got it from within the Christian faith.
To illustrate this point to his students, Sommerville invites them to do a
thought experiment. He points out that the pre-Christian northern European
tribes, like the Anglo-Saxons, had societies based on the concept of honor. They
were shame-based cultures in which earning and insisting upon respect from
others was paramount. The Christian monks who were trying to convert them
had a set of values based on charity, on wanting the best for others. To see the
difference he asks his students to imagine seeing a little old lady coming down
the street at night carrying a big purse. Why not just knock her over and take the
purse and its money? The answer of an honor-shame culture is that you do not
take her purse, because if you pick on the weak you would be a despicable
person. No one would respect you and you would not respect yourself. That
ethic, of course, is self-regarding. You are focused on how the action will affect
your honor and reputation. There is, however, another train of thought to take.
You may imagine how much it would hurt to be mugged, and how the loss of
money might harm people who depend on her. So you don’t take the money
because you want the best for her and for her dependents. This is an otherregarding ethic; you are thinking completely about her.
Over the years Sommerville found that the overwhelming majority of his
students reasoned according to the second, other-regarding ethic. As a historian,
he then showed them how Christian their moral orientation was. Christianity
changed those honor-based cultures in which pride was valued rather than
humility, dominance rather than service, courage rather than peaceableness,

glory rather than modesty, loyalty to one’s own tribe rather than equal respect for
all.10
The typical criticisms by secular people about the oppressiveness and
injustices of the Christian church actually come from Christianity’s own
resources for critique of itself. The shortcomings of the church can be
understood historically as the imperfect adoption and practice of the principles
of the Christian gospel. Sommerville says that when the Anglo-Saxons first
heard the Christian gospel message they were incredulous. They couldn’t see
how any society could survive that did not fear and respect strength. When they
did convert, they were far from consistent. They tended to merge the Christian
other-regarding ethic with their older ways. They supported the Crusades as a
way of protecting God’s honor and theirs. They let monks, women, and serfs
cultivate charitable virtues, but these virtues weren’t considered appropriate for
men of honor and action. No wonder there is so much to condemn in church
history. But to give up Christian standards would be to leave us with no basis for
the criticism.11
What is the answer, then, to the very fair and devastating criticisms of the
record of the Christian church? The answer is not to abandon the Christian faith,
because that would leave us with neither the standards nor the resources to make
correction. Instead we should move to a fuller and deeper grasp of what
Christianity is. The Bible itself has taught us to expect the abuses of religion and
it has also told us what to do about them. Because of this, Christian history gives
us many remarkable examples of self-correction. Let’s look at perhaps the two
leading examples of this.
Justice in Jesus’s Name
A deep stain on Christian history is the African slave trade. Since Christianity
was dominant in the nations that bought and sold slaves during that time, the
churches must bear responsibility along with their societies for what happened.
Even though slavery in some form was virtually universal in every human
culture over the centuries, it was Christians who first came to the conclusion that
it was wrong. The social historian Rodney Stark writes:
Although it has been fashionable to deny it, anti-slavery doctrines began to
appear in Christian theology soon after the decline of Rome and were

accompanied by the eventual disappearance of slavery in all but the fringes of
Christian Europe. When Europeans subsequently instituted slavery in the New
World, they did so over strenuous papal opposition, a fact that was conveniently
“lost” from history until recently. Finally, the abolition of New World slavery
was initiated and achieved by Christian activists.12
Christians began to work for abolition not because of some general
understanding of human rights, but because they saw it as violating the will of
God. Older forms of indentured servanthood and the bond-service of Biblical
times had often been harsh, but Christian abolitionists concluded that race-based,
life-long chattel slavery, established through kidnapping, could not be squared
with Biblical teaching either in the Old Testament or the New.13 Christian
activists such as William Wilberforce in Great Britain, John Woolman in
America, and many, many others devoted their entire lives, in the name of
Christ, to ending slavery. The slave trade was so tremendously lucrative that
there was enormous incentive within the church to justify it. Many church
leaders defended the institution. The battle for self-correction was titanic.14
When the abolitionists finally had British society poised to abolish slavery in
their empire, planters in the colonies foretold that emancipation would cost
investors enormous sums and the prices of commodities would skyrocket
catastrophically. This did not deter the Abolitionists in the House of Commons.
They agreed to compensate the planters for all freed slaves, an astounding sum
up to half of the British government’s annual budget. The Act of Emancipation
passed in 1833, and the costs were so high to the British people that one
historian called the British abolition of slavery “voluntary econocide.”
Rodney Stark notes how historians have been desperately trying to figure out
why the abolitionists were willing to sacrifice so much to end slavery. He quotes
the historian Howard Temperley, who says that the history of abolition is
puzzling because most historians believe all political behavior is self-interested.
Yet despite the fact that hundreds of scholars over the last fifty years have looked
for ways to explain it, Temperley says, “no one has succeeded in showing that
those who campaigned for the end of the slave trade…stood to gain in any
tangible way…or that these measures were other than economically costly to the
country.” Slavery was abolished because it was wrong, and Christians were the
leaders in saying so.15 Christianity’s self-correcting apparatus, its critique of
religiously supported acts of injustice, had asserted itself.

Another classic case of this is the Civil Rights movement in the United
States in the mid-twentieth century. In an important history of the movement,
David L. Chappell demonstrates that it was not a political but primarily a
religious and spiritual movement. White Northern liberals who were the allies of
the African-American civil rights leaders were not proponents of civil
disobedience or of a direct attack on segregation. Because of their secular belief
in the goodness of human nature, they thought that education and enlightenment
would bring about inevitable social and racial progress. Chappell argues that
black leaders were much more rooted in the Biblical understanding of the
sinfulness of the human heart and in the denunciations of injustice that they read
in the Hebrew prophets. Chappell also shows how it was the vibrant faith of
rank-and-file African-Americans that empowered them to insist on justice
despite the violent opposition to their demands. Thus Chappell says there is no
way to understand what happened until you see the Civil Rights movement as a
religious revival.16
When Martin Luther King, Jr., confronted racism in the white church in the
South, he did not call on Southern churches to become more secular. Read his
sermons and “Letter from Birmingham Jail” and see how he argued. He invoked
God’s moral law and the Scripture. He called white Christians to be more true to
their own beliefs and to realize what the Bible really teaches. He did not say
“Truth is relative and everyone is free to determine what is right or wrong for
them.” If everything is relative, there would have been no incentive for white
people in the South to give up their power. Rather, Dr. King invoked the prophet
Amos, who said, “Let justice roll down like waters, and righteousness as a
mighty stream” (Amos 5:24). The greatest champion of justice in our era knew
the antidote to racism was not less Christianity, but a deeper and truer
Christianity.
Wilberforce and King were not by any means the only leaders who have
turned the tide against injustice in the name of Christ. After apartheid was
abolished in South Africa, everyone expected a bloodbath in which former
victims would take violent vengeance on their persecutors and former oppressors
would defend themselves with force. Instead, Christian leaders like Desmond
Tutu set up the remarkable South African Commission for Truth and
Reconciliation in the mid-1990s. Its name expressed its principle and mission. It
invited victims to come forward to tell their stories publicly. It also invited
former perpetrators of oppression and violence to come forward, tell the truth,
and ask for amnesty. No side was exempt from appearing before the

commission. The commission heard reports of human rights violations and
considered amnesty applications from all sides, from the former apartheid state
as well as from the African National Congress. Though not without its flaws and
critics, the commission helped bring about the transition of majority rule with far
less bloodshed than anyone could have expected.
In the late twentieth century the Catholic church in eastern Europe refused to
die under Communism. Through “patience, candles, and crosses” it began the
chain of events that brought down all those totalitarian regimes. The Polish
priest Jerzy Popieluszko, through his preaching and activism, led the movement
for a free trade union in Communist Poland in the early 1980s. When he was
murdered by the secret police, 250,000 people came to his funeral, including
Lech Walesa, whose Solidarity movement would help bring down the
Communist government. Many of those who went to his funeral marched past
the secret police headquarters with a banner that read “We Forgive.”17 The
Christian underpinnings of the resistance movement were unmistakable.
There is a long list of martyrs who stood up for the oppressed in Jesus’s
name, such as Archbishop Oscar Romero of El Salvador. Romero was made
archbishop for his conservative, orthodox, doctrinal views. In his new post he
saw irrefutable evidence of chronic and violent human rights abuses by the
government. He began to speak out fearlessly against it, and as a result he was
shot to death in 1980 while saying Mass.
The famous Lutheran martyr Dietrich Bonhoeffer was pastoring two
German-speaking churches in London when Hitler came to power. He refused to
stay at a safe distance and returned to his country to head an illegal seminary for
the Confessing Church, the Christian congregations that refused to sign an oath
of allegiance to the Nazis. Bonhoeffer wrote the classic The Cost of Discipleship,
in which he critiqued the religion and church of his day. In echoes of Jesus and
the prophets, Bonhoeffer revealed the spiritual deadness and self-satisfied
complacency that made it possible for so many to cooperate with Hitler and turn
a blind eye to those being systematically marginalized and destroyed by the
Nazis. Bonhoeffer was eventually arrested and hanged.
In his last letters from prison, Bonhoeffer reveals how his Christian faith
gave him the resources to give up everything for the sake of others. Marx argued
that if you believe in a life after this one you won’t be concerned about making
this world a better place. You can also argue the opposite. If this world is all

there is, and if the goods of this world are the only love, comfort, and wealth I
will ever have, why should I sacrifice them for others? Bonhoeffer, however, had
a joy and hope in God that made it possible for him to do what he did:
It is not a religious act that makes the Christian, but participation in the
sufferings of God in the secular life. That is metanoia [repentance]: not in the
first place thinking about one’s own needs, problems, sins, and fears, but
allowing oneself to be caught up into the way of Jesus Christ…. Pain is a holy
angel…. Through him men have become greater than through all the joys of the
world…. The pain of longing, which often can be felt physically, must be there,
and we shall not and need not talk it away. But it needs to be overcome every
time, and thus there is an even holier angel than the one of pain, that is the one
of joy in God.18
Why mention all of these examples? They are evidence that Dr. King was
right. When people have done injustice in the name of Christ they are not being
true to the spirit of the one who himself died as a victim of injustice and who
called for the forgiveness of his enemies. When people give their lives to liberate
others as Jesus did, they are realizing the true Christianity that Martin Luther
King, Jr., Dietrich Bonhoeffer, and other Christian voices have called for.

FIVE

HOW CAN A LOVING GOD SEND PEOPLE TO HELL?

“I doubt the existence of a judgmental God who requires blood to pacify his
wrath,” said a frowning Hartmut, a graduate student from Germany. “Someone
had to die before the Christian God would pardon us. But why can’t he just
forgive? And then there’s all those places in the Old Testament where God
commands that people be slaughtered.”
“All that is troubling, I agree,” responded Josie, who worked for an art gallery
in Soho. “But I have even more of a problem with the doctrine of hell. The only
God that is believable to me is a God of love. The Bible’s God is no more than a
primitive deity who must be appeased with pain and suffering.”

IN 2005, Rick Warren, mega-church pastor and author of the bestselling book
The Purpose Driven Life, spoke to leading journalists at a forum sponsored by
the Pew Foundation. Some present were troubled by the civil implications of one
particular Christian belief, namely that God consigns some people to eternal
punishment. One speaker said to Warren:
Maybe you can hold in your mind the contradiction, which is that Wendy [a nonChristian reporter present] is a full American citizen deserving of every
protection that the most senior member of your church deserves. But when she
dies, she’s going to go to hell because she is not saved. The question is, do you
think your followers—or the people who come to church, the people who read
your books, the people you are talking to all over the world—are sophisticated
enough to hold this contradiction in their minds?…1
Warren responded that his church saw no contradiction between these things,
but many of the journalists were unconvinced. They suggested that any Christian

who thinks that there are people bound for hell must perceive such people as
unequal in dignity and worth. In this, they reflected the deep misgivings of many
today about the Christian concept of a God who judges people and sends them to
hell. That belief, they contend, leads to exclusion, abuse, division, and even
violence.
In our culture, divine judgment is one of Christianity’s most offensive
doctrines. As a minister and preacher I often find myself speaking on Biblical
texts that teach the wrath of God, the final judgment, and the doctrine of hell.
For many years I always held a question-and-answer session immediately after
each service. There I was regularly grilled by New Yorkers about these
teachings. I found their deep distress over this aspect of historic Christian faith
perfectly understandable. Although this objection to hell and judgment may
seem to be more of a feeling of revulsion than a doubt, we still can find a
number of very specific beliefs hidden inside it. Let’s look at each one in turn.
A God of Judgment Simply Can’t Exist
Robert Bellah’s influential work Habits of the Heart speaks of the “expressive
individualism” that dominates American culture. In his book Bellah notes that 80
percent of Americans agree with the statement “an individual should arrive at his
or her own religious beliefs independent of any church or synagogue.”2 He
concludes that the most fundamental belief in American culture is that moral
truth is relative to individual consciousness. Our culture, therefore, has no
problem with a God of love who supports us no matter how we live. It does,
however, object strongly to the idea of a God who punishes people for their
sincerely held beliefs, even if they are mistaken. This objection, however, has a
cultural history to it.
In C. S. Lewis’s classic The Abolition of Man, he outlines what he considers
to be a major difference between the ancient and the modern views of reality.
Lewis attacks our smug belief that ancient people believed in magic and later
modern science came along and supplanted it. As an expert in the medieval age
and how it gave way to modernity, Lewis knew that there had been very little
magic in the Middle Ages, that the high noon of magic was in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, at the very time that modern science was developing. The
same cause, he contended, gave rise to them both.

The serious magical endeavor and the serious scientific endeavor are twins: one
was sickly and died, the other was strong and throve. But they are twins. They
were born of the same impulse.3
Lewis describes that impulse—a new approach to moral and spiritual reality.
There is something which unites magic and applied science while separating
both from the “wisdom” of earlier ages. For the wise men of old the cardinal
problem had been how to conform the soul to reality, and the solution had been
knowledge, self-discipline, and virtue. For magic and applied science alike the
problem is how to subdue reality to the wishes of men: the solution is a
technique; and both, in the practice of this technique, are ready to do things
hitherto regarded as disgusting and impious….4
In ancient times it was understood that there was a transcendent moral order
outside the self, built in to the fabric of the universe. If you violated that
metaphysical order there were consequences just as severe as if you violated
physical reality by placing your hand in a fire. The path of wisdom was to learn
to live in conformity with this unyielding reality. That wisdom rested largely in
developing qualities of character, such as humility, compassion, courage,
discretion, and loyalty.
Modernity reversed this. Ultimate reality was seen not so much as a
supernatural order but as the natural world, and that was malleable. Instead of
trying to shape our desires to fit reality, we now seek to control and shape reality
to fit our desires. The ancients looked at an anxious person and prescribed
spiritual character change. Modernity talks instead about stress-management
techniques.
Lewis knew that readers might think he was against the scientific method as
such, but he protested that he was not. He wanted us to realize, however, that the
modernity was born in “dreams of power.” Writing during World War II, Lewis
was standing in the midst of some of the bitterest fruit of the modern spirit.
Lewis’s friend J. R. R. Tolkien wrote The Lord of the Rings about the
consequences of seeking power and control rather than wisdom and glad
enjoyment of the “givenness” of God’s creation.5

The spirit of modernity, then, gave us the responsibility to determine right or
wrong. Our new confidence that we can control the physical environment has
spilled over so we now think we can reshape the metaphysical realm as well. It
seems to our minds unfair, therefore, that we should determine that it is all right
to have sex outside of marriage and later discover that there is a God who is
going to punish us for that. We believe so deeply in our personal rights in this
realm that the very idea of a divine Judgment Day seems impossible. However,
as Lewis shows us, this belief is tied to a quest for control and power that has
had terrible consequences in recent world history. Not all the human race today
has accepted modernity’s view of things. Why should we act as if it is
inescapable?
In one of my after-service discussions a woman told me that the very idea of
a judging God was offensive. I said, “Why aren’t you offended by the idea of a
forgiving God?” She looked puzzled. I continued, “I respectfully urge you to
consider your cultural location when you find the Christian teaching about hell
offensive.” I went on to point out that secular Westerners get upset by the
Christian doctrines of hell, but they find Biblical teaching about turning the other
cheek and forgiving enemies appealing. I then asked her to consider how
someone from a very different culture sees Christianity. In traditional societies
the teaching about “turning the other cheek” makes absolutely no sense. It
offends people’s deepest instincts about what is right. For them the doctrine of a
God of judgment, however, is no problem at all. That society is repulsed by
aspects of Christianity that Western people enjoy, and are attracted by the aspects
that secular Westerners can’t stand.
Why, I concluded, should Western cultural sensibilities be the final court in
which to judge whether Christianity is valid? I asked the woman gently whether
she thought her culture superior to non-Western ones. She immediately answered
“no.” “Well then,” I asked, “why should your culture’s objections to Christianity
trump theirs?”
For the sake of argument, let’s imagine that Christianity is not the product of
any one culture but is actually the transcultural truth of God. If that were the case
we would expect that it would contradict and offend every human culture at
some point, because human cultures are ever-changing and imperfect. If
Christianity were the truth it would have to be offending and correcting your
thinking at some place. Maybe this is the place, the Christian doctrine of divine
judgment.

A God of Judgment Can’t Be a God of Love
In Christianity God is both a God of love and of justice. Many people struggle
with this. They believe that a loving God can’t be a judging God. Like most
other Christian ministers in our society, I have been asked literally thousands of
times, “How can a God of love be also a God of filled with wrath and anger? If
he is loving and perfect, he should forgive and accept everyone. He shouldn’t get
angry.”
I always start my response by pointing out that all loving persons are
sometimes filled with wrath, not just despite of but because of their love. If you
love a person and you see someone ruining them—even they themselves—you
get angry. As Becky Pippert puts it in her book Hope Has Its Reasons:
Think how we feel when we see someone we love ravaged by unwise actions or
relationships. Do we respond with benign tolerance as we might toward
strangers? Far from it…. Anger isn’t the opposite of love. Hate is, and the final
form of hate is indiffer ence…. God’s wrath is not a cranky explosion, but his
settled opposition to the cancer…which is eating out the insides of the human
race he loves with his whole being.6
The Bible says that God’s wrath flows from his love and delight in his
creation. He is angry at evil and injustice because it is destroying its peace and
integrity.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways and loving toward all he has made…
The Lord watches over those who love him, but all the wicked he will destroy.
(Psalms 145:17-20)
It is at this point that many people complain that those who believe in a God
of judgment will not approach enemies with a desire to reconcile with them. If
you believe in a God who smites evildoers, you may think it perfectly justified to
do some of the smiting yourself. Yale theologian Miroslav Volf, a Croatian who
has seen the violence in the Balkans, does not see the doctrine of God’s
judgment that way. He writes:

If God were not angry at injustice and deception and did not make a final end to
violence—that God would not be worthy of worship…. The only means of
prohibiting all recourse to violence by ourselves is to insist that violence is
legitimate only when it comes from God…. My thesis that the practice of nonviolence requires a belief in divine vengeance will be unpopular with many…in
the West…. [But] it takes the quiet of a suburban home for the birth of the thesis
that human non-violence [results from the belief in] God’s refusal to judge. In a
sun-scorched land, soaked in the blood of the innocent, it will invariably die…
[with] other pleasant captivities of the liberal mind.7
In this fascinating passage Volf reasons that it is the lack of belief in a God
of vengeance that “secretly nourishes violence.”8 The human impulse to make
perpetrators of violence pay for their crimes is almost an overwhelming one. It
cannot possibly be overcome with platitudes like “Now don’t you see that
violence won’t solve anything?” If you have seen your home burned down and
your relatives killed and raped, such talk is laughable—and it shows no real
concern for justice. Yet victims of violence are drawn to go far beyond justice
into the vengeance that says, “You put out one of my eyes, so I will put out both
of yours.” They are pulled inexorably into an endless cycle of vengeance, of
strikes and counterstrikes nurtured and justified by the memory of terrible
wrongs.
Can our passion for justice be honored in a way that does not nurture our
desire for blood vengeance? Volf says the best resource for this is belief in the
concept of God’s divine justice. If I don’t believe that there is a God who will
eventually put all things right, I will take up the sword and will be sucked into
the endless vortex of retaliation. Only if I am sure that there’s a God who will
right all wrongs and settle all accounts perfectly do I have the power to refrain.
Czeslaw Milosz, the Nobel Prize–winning Polish poet, wrote the remarkable
essay “The Discreet Charms of Nihilism.” In it he remembers how Marx had
called religion “the opiate of the people” because the promise of an afterlife
(Marx said) led the poor and the working class to put up with unjust social
conditions. But, Milosz continued:
And now we are witnessing a transformation. A true opium of the people is a
belief in nothingness after death—the huge solace of thinking that our betrayals,
greed, cowardice, murders are not going to be judged…[but] all religions

recognize that our deeds are imperishable.9
Many people complain that belief in a God of judgment will lead to a more
brutal society. Milosz had personally seen, in both Nazism and Communism, that
a loss of belief in a God of judgment can lead to brutality. If we are free to shape
life and morals any way we choose without ultimate accountability, it can lead to
violence. Volf and Milosz argue that the doctrine of God’s final judgment is a
necessary undergirding for human practices of love and peacemaking.
A Loving God Would Not Allow Hell
“Ah,” you may say, “fighting evil and injustice in the world is one thing, but
sending people to hell is another. The Bible speaks of eternal punishment. How
does that fit in with the love of God? I cannot reconcile even the idea of hell
with a loving God.” How do we address this understandable recoiling?
Modern people inevitably think that hell works like this: God gives us time,
but if we haven’t made the right choices by the end of our lives, he casts our
souls into hell for all eternity. As the poor souls fall through space, they cry out
for mercy, but God says “Too late! You had your chance! Now you will suffer!”
This caricature misunderstands the very nature of evil. The Biblical picture is
that sin separates us from the presence of God, which is the source of all joy and
indeed of all love, wisdom, or good things of any sort. Since we were originally
created for God’s immediate presence, only before his face will we thrive,
flourish, and achieve our highest potential. If we were to lose his presence
totally, that would be hell—the loss of our capability for giving or receiving love
or joy.
A common image of hell in the Bible is that of fire.10 Fire disintegrates.
Even in this life we can see the kind of soul disintegration that self-centeredness
creates. We know how selfishness and self-absorption leads to piercing
bitterness, nauseating envy, paralyzing anxiety, paranoid thoughts, and the
mental denials and distortions that accompany them. Now ask the question:
“What if when we die we don’t end, but spiritually our life extends on into
eternity?”
Hell, then, is the trajectory of a soul, living a self-absorbed, self-centered
life, going on and on forever.

Jesus’s parable of Lazarus and the Rich Man in Luke 16 supports the view of
hell we are presenting here. Lazarus is a poor man who begs at the gate of a
cruel rich man. They both die and Lazarus goes to heaven while the rich man
goes to hell. There he looks up and sees Lazarus in heaven “in Abraham’s
bosom”:
So he called to him, “Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip
the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this
fire.” But Abraham replied, “Son, remember that in your lifetime you received
your good things, while Lazarus received bad things, but now he is comforted
here and you are in agony. And besides all this, between us and you a great
chasm has been fixed, so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor
can anyone cross over from there to us.” He answered, “Then I beg you, father,
send Lazarus to my father’s house, for I have five brothers. Let him warn them,
so that they will not also come to this place of torment.” Abraham replied, “They
have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them.” “No, father Abraham,” he
said, “but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.” He said to
him, “If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they will not be convinced
even if someone rises from the dead” Luke 16:24-31).
What is astonishing is that though their statuses have now been reversed, the
rich man seems to be blind to what has happened. He still expects Lazarus to be
his servant and treats him as his water boy. He does not ask to get out of hell, yet
strongly implies that God never gave him and his family enough information
about the afterlife. Commentators have noted the astonishing amount of denial,
blame-shifting, and spiritual blindness in this soul in hell. They have also noted
that the rich man, unlike Lazarus, is never given a personal name. He is only
called a “Rich Man,” strongly hinting that since he had built his identity on his
wealth rather than on God, once he lost his wealth he lost any sense of a self.
In short, hell is simply one’s freely chosen identity apart from God on a
trajectory into infinity. We see this process “writ small” in addictions to drugs,
alcohol, gambling, and pornography. First, there is disintegration, because as
time goes on you need more and more of the addictive substance to get an equal
kick, which leads to less and less satisfaction. Second, there is the isolation, as
increasingly you blame others and circumstances in order to justify your
behavior. “No one understands! Everyone is against me!” is muttered in greater
and greater self-pity and self-absorption. When we build our lives on anything

but God, that thing—though a good thing—becomes an enslaving addiction,
something we have to have to be happy. Personal disintegration happens on a
broader scale. In eternity, this disintegration goes on forever. There is increasing
isolation, denial, delusion, and self-absorption. When you lose all humility you
are out of touch with reality. No one ever asks to leave hell. The very idea of
heaven seems to them a sham.
In his fantasy The Great Divorce, C. S. Lewis describes a busload of people
from hell who come to the outskirts of heaven. There they are urged to leave
behind the sins that have trapped them in hell—but they refuse. Lewis’s
descriptions of these people are striking because we recognize in them the selfdelusion and self-absorption that are “writ small” in our own addictions.11
Hell begins with a grumbling mood, always complaining, always blaming
others…but you are still distinct from it. You may even criticize it in yourself and
wish you could stop it. But there may come a day when you can no longer. Then
there will be no you left to criticize the mood or even to enjoy it, but just the
grumble itself, going on forever like a machine. It is not a question of God
“sending us” to hell. In each of us there is something growing, which will BE
Hell unless it is nipped in the bud.12
The people in hell are miserable, but Lewis shows us why. We see raging
like unchecked flames their pride, their paranoia, their self-pity, their certainty
that everyone else is wrong, that everyone else is an idiot! All their humility is
gone, and thus so is their sanity. They are utterly, finally locked in a prison of
their own self-centeredness, and their pride progressively expands into a bigger
and bigger mushroom cloud. They continue to go to pieces forever, blaming
everyone but themselves. Hell is that, writ large.
That is why it is a travesty to picture God casting people into a pit who are
crying “I’m sorry! Let me out!” The people on the bus from hell in Lewis’s
parable would rather have their “freedom,” as they define it, than salvation.
Their delusion is that, if they glorified God, they would somehow lose power
and freedom, but in a supreme and tragic irony, their choice has ruined their own
potential for greatness. Hell is, as Lewis says, “the greatest monument to human
freedom.” As Romans 1:24 says, God “gave them up to…their desires.” All God
does in the end with people is give them what they most want, including
freedom from himself. What could be more fair than that? Lewis writes:

There are only two kinds of people—those who say “Thy will be done” to God or
those to whom God in the end says, “ Thy will be done.” All that are in Hell
choose it. Without that self-choice it wouldn’t be Hell. No soul that seriously and
constantly desires joy will ever miss it.13
Hell and the Equality of People
Let’s return to the doubtful journalists at the Pew Forum with Rick Warren. They
were concerned that any Christian who believes that some people are bound for
hell must necessarily perceive such people to be unequal, less deserving of civil
rights. This concern misunderstands what the Bible teaches about the nature of
salvation and damnation.
As C. S. Lewis points out, the journey to hell is a process, which can begin
with something as apparently innocuous as a grumbling mood. No one can look
out at a congregation on a Sunday morning, a crowd at Yankee Stadium, or the
audience at the Metropolitan Opera, and be sure of who is ultimately going to
arrive in heaven or hell. Today’s outspoken believer may be tomorrow’s
apostate, and today’s outspoken unbeliever may be tomorrow’s convert. We must
not make settled, final decisions about anyone’s spiritual state or fate.
After speaking about the Christian faith to a gathering in a Manhattan town
house, I was approached by two women who had heard my presentation. They
both told me that believing in eternal judgment made me a very narrow person. I
asked them, “You think I’m wrong about these religious questions, and I think
you are wrong. Why doesn’t that make you as narrow as me?” One woman
retorted, “That’s different. You think we are eternally lost! We don’t think you
are. That makes you more narrow than us.” I didn’t agree, and here is what I
proposed to them.
Both the Christian and the secular person believe that self-centeredness and
cruelty have very harmful consequences. Because Christians believe souls don’t
die, they also believe that moral and spiritual errors affect the soul forever.
Liberal, secular persons also believe that there are terrible moral and spiritual
errors, like exploitation and oppression. But since they don’t believe in an
afterlife, they don’t think the consequences of wrongdoing go on into eternity.
Because Christians think wrongdoing has infinitely more long-term
consequences than secular people do, does that mean they are somehow

narrower?
Imagine two people arguing over the nature of a cookie. Jack thinks the
cookie is poison, and Jill thinks it is not. Jack thinks Jill’s mistaken view of the
cookie will send her to the hospital or worse. Jill thinks Jack’s mistaken view of
the cookie will keep him from having a fine dessert. Is Jack more narrowminded than Jill just because he thinks the consequences of her mistake are more
dire? I don’t believe anyone would think so. Christians, therefore, aren’t more
narrow because they think wrong thinking and behavior have eternal effects.
“I Believe in a God of Love”
During my college years and my early twenties I, like so many others,
questioned the Christian faith I was raised in. There were subjective reasons for
my doubts. Christianity just didn’t seem real to me experientially. I had not
developed a prayer life and had never experienced God personally. There were
also intellectual problems I was having with Christianity, all of which I am
addressing elsewhere in this book. There was one, however, I will talk about
here.
I was troubled by those Christians who stressed hellfire and damnation. Like
so many of my generation I believed that, if there was a core to all religions, it
was a loving God. I wanted to believe in a God of love who accepted people
regardless of their beliefs and practices. I began to take courses in the other
major religions of the world—Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Confucianism, and
Judaism. I have profited to this day from those studies. However, my
explorations in other faiths proved me wrong on this particular point about the
centrality of a loving God.
I found no other religious text outside of the Bible that said God created the
world out of love and delight. Most ancient pagan religions believed the world
was created through struggles and violent battles between opposing gods and
supernatural forces. I turned to look more closely at Buddhism, the religion I
liked best at the time. However, despite its great emphasis on selflessness and
detached service to others, Buddhism did not believe in a personal God at all,
and love is the action of a person.
Later on, after I became a minister, I was a speaker and panelist for several
years in a monthly discussion program in Philadelphia between a Christian

church and a mosque. Each month a speaker from the church and a speaker from
the mosque would give a Biblical and Qu’ranic perspective on a topic. When we
covered the topic of God’s love, it was striking how different our conceptions
were. I was told repeatedly by Muslim speakers that God was indeed loving in
the sense of being merciful and kind to us. But when Christians spoke of the
Lord as our spouse, of knowing God intimately and personally, and of having
powerful effusions of his love poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, our
Muslim friends balked. They told us that it was disrespectful, in their view, to
speak of anyone knowing God personally.
Today many of the skeptics I talk to say, as I once did, they can’t believe in
the God of the Bible, who punishes and judges people, because they “believe in
a God of Love.” I now ask, what makes them think God is Love? Can they look
at life in the world today and say, “This proves that the God of the world is a
God of love”? Can they look at history and say, “This all shows that the God of
history is a God of love”? Can they look at the religious texts of the world and
conclude that God is a God of love? By no means is that the dominant, ruling
attribute of God as understood in any of the major faiths. I must conclude that
the source of the idea that God is Love is the Bible itself. And the Bible tells us
that the God of love is also a God of judgment who will put all things in the
world to rights in the end.
The belief in a God of pure love—who accepts everyone and judges no one
—is a powerful act of faith. Not only is there no evidence for it in the natural
order, but there is almost no historical, religious textual support for it outside of
Christianity. The more one looks at it, the less justified it appears.

SIX

SCIENCE HAS DISPROVED CHRISTIANITY

“My scientific training makes it difficult if not impossible to accept the teachings
of Christianity,” said Thomas, a young Asian medical resident. “As a believer in
evolution, I can’t accept the Bible’s prescientific accounts of the origin of life.”
“And the Bible is filled with accounts of miracles,” added Michelle, a med
student. “They simply could not have happened.”

THE bestselling books by Richard Dawkins, Daniel C. Dennett, and Sam
Harris assume that science in general, and evolutionary science in particular, has
made belief in God unnecessary and obsolete. Dawkins said very famously that
“although atheism might have been logically tenable before Darwin, Darwin
made it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled atheist.”1 In The God Delusion
he goes much further. He argues that you cannot be an intelligent scientific
thinker and still hold religious beliefs. It is one or the other. To support his thesis
he points out that a study in 1998 showed that only about 7 percent of American
scientists in the National Academy of Sciences believe in a personal God.2 This
is proof that the more intelligent, rational, and scientifically minded you are, the
less you will be able to believe in God.
Is Dawkins right? Has science essentially disproved Christian beliefs? Must
we choose between thinking scientifically and belief in God?
Aren’t Miracles Scientifically Impossible?
The first reason that many people think science has disproved traditional religion
is that most of the major faiths believe in miracles, the intervention of God into
the natural order. The miraculous is particularly important for Christian belief.

Christians annually celebrate the miracle of the incarnation, the birth of Jesus,
each Christmas, and the miracle of the bodily resurrection of Jesus from the dead
each Easter. The New Testament is filled with accounts of miracles that Jesus
performed during the course of his ministry. Scientific mistrust of the Bible
began with the Enlightenment belief that miracles cannot be reconciled to a
modern, rational view of the world. Armed with this presupposition, scholars
turned to the Bible and said, “The Biblical accounts can’t be reliable because
they contain descriptions of miracles.” The premise behind such a claim is
“Science has proven that there is no such thing as miracles.”3 But embedded in
such a statement is a leap of faith.
It is one thing to say that science is only equipped to test for natural causes
and cannot speak to any others. It is quite another to insist that science proves
that no other causes could possibly exist. John Macquarrie writes: “Science
proceeds on the assumption that whatever events occur in the world can be
accounted for in terms of other events…just as immanent and this-worldly. [So]
…Miracle is irreconcilable with our modern understanding of both science and
history.”4
Macquarrie is quite right to assert that, when studying a phenomenon, the
scientist must always assume there is a natural cause. That is because natural
causes are the only kind its methodology can address. It is another thing to insist
that science has proven there can’t be any other kind. There would be no
experimental model for testing the statement: “No supernatural cause for any
natural phenomenon is possible.” It is therefore a philosophical presupposition
and not a scientific finding. Macquarrie’s argument is ultimately circular. He
says that science, by its nature, can’t discern or test for supernatural causes, and
therefore, those causes can’t exist.
The philosopher Alvin Plantinga responds:
Macquarrie perhaps means to suggest that the very practice of science requires
that one reject the idea (e.g.) of God raising someone from the dead…. [This]
argument…is like the drunk who insisted on looking for his lost car keys only
under the streetlight on the grounds that the light was better there. In fact, it
would go the drunk one better: it would insist that because the keys would be
hard to find in the dark, they must be under the light.5

The other hidden premise in the statement “miracles cannot happen” is
“there can’t be a God who does miracles.” If there is a Creator God, there is
nothing illogical at all about the possibility of miracles. After all, if he created
everything out of nothing, it would hardly be a problem for him to rearrange
parts of it as and when he wishes. To be sure that miracles cannot occur you
would have to be sure beyond a doubt that God didn’t exist, and that is an article
of faith. The existence of God can be neither demonstrably proven or disproven.
Isn’t Science in Conflict with Christianity?
It is common to believe today that there is a war going on between science and
religion. One of the reasons for this perception is that the media needs to report
news events as stories with protagonists and antagonists. It gives wide publicity
to battles between secular and religious people over the teaching of evolution in
schools, stem-cell research, in vitro fertilization, and many other areas of
medicine and science. These battles give credibility to the claims of Dawkins,
Harris, and others that it is either-or—you can be either scientific and rational or
religious.
Over the years at Redeemer I’ve talked to many people trained in science
and biology who were very wary of orthodox Christian belief. One young
medical student said to me, “The Bible denies evolution, which most educated
people accept. It bothers me terribly that so many Christians, because of their
belief in the Bible, can take such an unscientific mind-set.” His concern is quite
understandable. Here’s how I responded to him.
Evolutionary science assumes that more complex life-forms evolved from
less complex forms through a process of natural selection. Many Christians
believe that God brought about life this way. For example, the Catholic church,
the largest church in the world, has made official pronouncements supporting
evolution as being compatible with Christian belief.6 However, Christians may
believe in evolution as a process without believing in “philosophical
naturalism”—the view that everything has a natural cause and that organic life is
solely the product of random forces guided by no one. When evolution is turned
into an All-encompassing Theory explaining absolutely everything we believe,
feel, and do as the product of natural selection, then we are not in the arena of
science, but of philosophy. Evolution as an All-encompassing Theory has
insurmountable difficulties as a worldview. We will look at these difficulties in

Chapter 9.
Dawkins argues that if you believe in evolution as a biological mechanism
you must also believe in philosophical naturalism. But why? The same year that
Dawkins’s The God Delusion was published, Francis Collins published The
Language of God. Collins is an eminent research scientist and head of the
Human Genome Project. He believes in evolutionary science and critiques the
Intelligent Design movement that denies the transmutation of species. However,
Collins believes that the fine-tuning, beauty, and order of nature nonetheless
point to a divine Creator, and describes his conversion from atheism to
Christianity. Here then is what Dawkins says can’t exist, someone with a firm
belief in evolution as biological mechanism, but who completely rejects
philosophical naturalism. Collins, of course, is not alone.7
Contrary to Dawkins’s simplistic schema, there are many different models
proposed about how God relates to the development of the life-forms we see
today. Ian Barbour lays out four different ways that science and religion may be
related to each other: conflict, dialogue, integration, and independence. At the
one end of the spectrum, in “conflict,” are both the proponents of “creation
science” and, ironically, thinkers like Dawkins. Each side has bought in to the
warfare model of the relationship of science to faith. Many creationists’ view of
Genesis 1 makes any kind of evolutionary process impossible, while the
philosophical naturalism of Dawkins makes religious belief totally invalid. At
the other end of the spectrum, there are those who believe faith is mainly a
private, subjective thing and therefore does not speak to the empirical realm at
all. In this view science and religion have nothing to say to each other at all.
Barbour himself thinks this view gives away too much, and prefers the spectrum
of more moderate and complicated approaches in which science and religious
faith recognize their respective their spheres of authority.8
It is the conflict model, however, that gets the most publicity. Fortunately,
this view is losing credibility with a growing number of scholars. The history of
the secularization of American institutions is treated in an important and
influential book edited by Christian Smith.9 In it Smith argues that the conflict
model of the relationship of science to religion was a deliberate exaggeration
used by both scientists and educational leaders at the end of the nineteenth
century to undermine the church’s control of their institutions and increase their
own cultural power.10 The absolute warfare model of science and reason was the
product not so much of intellectual necessity but rather of a particular cultural

strategy. Many scientists see no incompatibility between faith in God and their
work.
Two famous studies that support this contention were done in 1916 and
1997. The American psychologist James Leuba conducted the first survey of
scientists, asking them if they believed in a God who actively communicates
with humanity, at least through prayer. Forty percent said they did, 40 percent
said they did not, and 20 percent were not sure. In 1997, Edward Larson and
Larry Witham repeated this survey asking the very same questions of scientists.
They reported in the scientific journal Nature that they had found that the
numbers had not changed significantly in eighty years.11
What, then, of Dawkins’s claim that nearly all prominent scientists
disbelieve in God? In The God Delusion he cites Larson and Witham’s follow-up
correspondence in Nature a year later. There they noted that when they asked the
same questions about belief in God to members of the National Academy of
Sciences only 7 percent said “yes.”12 Dawkins cites this statistic as evidence that
intelligent scientific thinking almost always leads to the conclusion that God
does not exist. There are, however, major problems with the way Dawkins, and
even Larson and Witham, interpret the data from these studies.
First, keep in mind the original question posed to the scientists in both
surveys. Scientists are asked if they believe in a God who personally
communicates with humanity. To hold that a transcendent God created the
universe is not enough to be listed as a “believer.” Any NAS scientist who
believes in a God who does not communicate directly with humanity is
automatically put into the category of disbeliever. The surveys were only
designed to “see” scientists with conservative, traditional belief. Those with a
more general belief in God are screened out by the way the question is
formulated. Second, Dawkins reads the data as establishing a causal relationship
between the scientific mind and atheism. His assumption is that NAS scientists
disbelieve because they are scientifically minded. However, the study does not
and cannot prove what the cause of NAS scientists’ disbelief in God really is.
Alister McGrath, a theologian with an Oxford doctorate in biophysics, writes
that most of the many unbelieving scientists he knows are atheists on other
grounds than their science. Many complex factors lead a person to belief or
disbelief in God. Some are personal experiences, some are intellectual, and some
are social. Sociologists of knowledge like Peter Berger have shown that our peer
group and primary relationships shape our beliefs much more than we want to

admit. Scientists, like non-scientists, are very effected by the beliefs and
attitudes of the people from whom they want respect. In McGrath’s experience,
most of his atheist colleagues brought their assumptions about God to their
science rather than basing them on their science.13
Also, Dawkins gives readers the impression that all atheistic scientists would
agree with him that no rational, scientific mind could believe in God. But that is
simply not the case. Stephen Jay Gould, the late Harvard scientist and
evolutionist who was himself an atheist, knew all about these studies, but could
not conclude with Dawkins that science necessarily clashed with Christian faith.
He wrote:
Either half my colleagues are enormously stupid, or else the science of
Darwinism is fully compatible with conventional religious beliefs—and equally
compatible with atheism.14
When Gould spoke of “half his colleagues,” he was probably not thinking
strictly of survey data. He simply knew that a great number of his most respected
scientific colleagues had traditional religious beliefs about God. One of the
reasons Gould does not agree with Dawkins is that he was much more willing to
concede that science might not be able to account for everything about human
existence to every thinker’s satisfaction.
Another scholar who makes this point is the philosopher Thomas Nagel, who
critiqued Dawkins’s approach in a review of The God Delusion in the journal
The New Republic. Nagel, too, is an atheist, but thinks Dawkins is wrong to
insist that, if we are going to be scientific at all, we must embrace “physicalist
naturalism…that the ultimate explanation of everything must lie in particle
physics, string theory, or whatever purely extensional laws govern the elements
of which the material world is composed.” He asks, for example, whether we
really believe that our moral intuitions, such as that genocide is morally wrong,
are not real but only the result of neurochemistry hardwired into us. Can physical
science do full justice to reality as human beings experience it? Nagel doubts
that. He writes:
The reductionist project usually tries to reclaim some of the originally excluded
aspects of the world, by analyzing them in physical—that is, behavioral or

neurophysiological—terms; but it denies reality to what cannot be so reduced. I
believe the project is doomed—that conscious experience, thought, value, and so
forth are not illusions, even though they cannot be identified with physical
facts.15
This is why even many atheists believe Dawkins is wrong, that science
cannot explain everything, and why scientific thought can be compatible with
religious belief.
Even though the concept of warfare between science and religion still has
much popular credence, we should disabuse ourselves of the notion that we have
to choose between the two, or that if you want to be a Christian you will have to
be in conflict with science. A majority of scientists consider themselves deeply
or moderately religious—and those numbers have increased in recent decades.16
There is no necessary disjunction between science and devout faith.
Doesn’t Evolution Disprove the Bible?
What about the more specific issue of how evolutionary science fits with the
Biblical account of creation in Genesis 1 and 2? Surely there we have a head-on
collision. No, that’s not the case.
Different Christian thinkers use all of Barbour’s models of relating science
to faith—conflict, dialogue, integration, and independence. Some Christians in
the highly publicized Creation Science movement take the conflict model and
insist that Genesis 1 teaches that God created all life-forms in a period of six
twenty-four-hour days just several thousand years ago. At the other end of the
spectrum are Christians who take the independence model and simply say that
God was the primary cause in beginning the world and after that natural causes
took over. Other thinkers occupy the central positions. Some hold that God
created life and then guided natural selection to develop all complex life-forms
from simpler ones. In this view, God acts as a top-down cause without violating
the process of evolution. Others, believing there are gaps in the fossil record and
claiming that species seem to “appear” rather than develop from simpler forms,
believe that God performed large-scale creative acts at different points over
longer periods of time.
The relationship of science to the Bible hinges not only on how we read the

scientific record but how we interpret certain key Biblical passages, such as
Genesis 1. Christians who accept the Bible’s authority agree that the primary
goal of Biblical interpretation is to discover the Biblical author’s original
meaning as he sought to be understood by his audience. This has always meant
interpreting a text according to its literary genre. For example, when Christians
read the Psalms they read it as poetry. When they read Luke, which claims to be
an eyewitness account (see Luke 1:1-4), they take it as history. Any reader can
see that the historical narrative should be read as history and that the poetic
imagery is to be read as metaphorical.
The difficulty comes in the few places in the Bible where the genre is not
easily identifiable, and we aren’t completely sure how the author expects it to be
read. Genesis 1 is a passage whose interpretation is up for debate among
Christians, even those with a “high” view of inspired Scripture.17 I personally
take the view that Genesis 1 and 2 relate to each other the way Judges 4 and 5
and Exodus 14 and 15 do. In each couplet one chapter describes a historical
event and the other is a song or poem about the theological meaning of the event.
When reading Judges 4 it is obvious that it is a sober recounting of what
happened in the battle, but when we read Judges 5, Deborah’s Song about the
battle, the language is poetic and metaphorical. When Deborah sings that the
stars in the heavens came down to fight for the Israelites, we understand that she
means that metaphorically. I think Genesis 1 has the earmarks of poetry and is
therefore a “song” about the wonder and meaning of God’s creation. Genesis 2 is
an account of how it happened. There will always be debates about how to
interpret some passages—including Genesis 1. But it is false logic to argue that
if one part of Scripture can’t be taken literally then none of it can be. That isn’t
true of any human communication.
What can we conclude? Since Christian believers occupy different positions
on both the meaning of Genesis 1 and on the nature of evolution, those who are
considering Christianity as a whole should not allow themselves to be distracted
by this intramural debate. The skeptical inquirer does not need to accept any one
of these positions in order to embrace the Christian faith. Rather, he or she
should concentrate on and weigh the central claims of Christianity. Only after
drawing conclusions about the person of Christ, the resurrection, and the central
tenets of the Christian message should one think through the various options
with regard to creation and evolution.
Representatives of these different views often imply that their approach is

the One True Christian Position on Evolution.18 Indeed, I’m sure that many
reading this will be irritated that I don’t take time here to adjudicate between the
competing views. For the record I think God guided some kind of process of
natural selection, and yet I reject the concept of evolution as All-encompassing
Theory. One commentator on Genesis captures this balance well:
If “evolution” is…elevated to the status of a world-view of the way things are,
then there is direct conflict with biblical faith. But if “evolution” remains at the
level of scientific biological hypothesis, it would seem that there is little reason
for conflict between the implications of Christian belief in the Creator and the
scientific explorations of the way which—at the level of biology—God has gone
about his creating processes.19
Healing the World
I don’t want to be too hard on people who struggle with the idea of God’s
intervention in the natural order. Miracles are hard to believe in, and they should
be. In Matthew 28 we are told that the apostles met the risen Jesus on a
mountainside in Galilee. “When they saw him, they worshipped him; but some
doubted” (verse 17). That is a remarkable admission. Here is the author of an
early Christian document telling us that some of the founders of Christianity
couldn’t believe the miracle of the resurrection, even when they were looking
straight at him with their eyes and touching him with their hands. There is no
other reason for this to be in the account unless it really happened.
The passage shows us several things. It is a warning not to think that only we
modern, scientific people have to struggle with the idea of the miraculous, while
ancient, more primitive people did not. The apostles responded like any group of
modern people—some believed their eyes and some didn’t. It is also an
encouragement to patience. All the apostles ended up as great leaders in the
church, but some had a lot more trouble believing than others.
The most instructive thing about this text is, however, what it says about the
purpose of Biblical miracles. They lead not simply to cognitive belief, but to
worship, to awe and wonder. Jesus’s miracles in particular were never magic
tricks, designed only to impress and coerce. You never see him say something
like: “See that tree over there? Watch me make it burst into flames!” Instead, he
used miraculous power to heal the sick, feed the hungry, and raise the dead.

Why? We modern people think of miracles as the suspension of the natural
order, but Jesus meant them to be the restoration of the natural order. The Bible
tells us that God did not originally make the world to have disease, hunger, and
death in it. Jesus has come to redeem where it is wrong and heal the world where
it is broken. His miracles are not just proofs that he has power but also
wonderful foretastes of what he is going to do with that power. Jesus’s miracles
are not just a challenge to our minds, but a promise to our hearts, that the world
we all want is coming.

SEVEN

YOU CAN’T TAKE THE BIBLE LITERALLY

“I see much of the Bible’s teaching as historically inaccurate,” said Charles, an
investment banker. “We can’t be sure the Bible’s account of events is what really
happened.”
“I’m sure you’re right, Charles,” answered Jaclyn, a woman working in finance.
“But my biggest problem with the Bible is that it is culturally obsolete. Much of
the Bible’s social teaching (for example, about women) is socially regressive. So
it is impossible to accept the Bible as the complete authority Christians think it
is.”

WHEN I was in college in the late 1960s I took some courses on the Bible as
literature and was confronted with the prevailing wisdom of the time. My
professors taught that the New Testament gospels originated as the oral traditions
of various church communities around the Mediterranean. These stories about
Jesus were shaped by those communities to address the questions and needs
peculiar to each church. Leaders made certain that the Jesus in these stories
supported the policies and beliefs of their communities. The oral traditions were
then passed down over the years, evolving through the addition of various
legendary materials. Finally, long after the actual events, the gospels assumed
written form. By then it was almost impossible to know to what degree, if any,
they represented the actual historical events.
Who then was the original Jesus? The scholars I read proposed that the real,
“historical Jesus” was a charismatic teacher of justice and wisdom who
provoked opposition and was executed. After his death, they said, different
parties and viewpoints emerged among his followers about who he was. Some
claimed he was divine and risen from the dead, others that he was just a human
teacher who lived on spiritually in the hearts of his disciples. After a power

struggle, the “divine Jesus” party won and created texts that promoted its views.
They allegedly suppressed and destroyed all the alternative texts showing us a
different sort of Jesus. Recently, some of these suppressed, alternate views of
Jesus have come to light—like the “Gnostic” gospels of Thomas and Judas. This
shows, it is said, that early Christianity was very diverse in its doctrinal beliefs.
If this view of the New Testament’s origins and development is true, it
would radically change our understanding of the content and meaning of
Christianity itself. It would mean that no one could really know what Jesus said
and did, and that the Bible could not be the authoritative norm over our life and
beliefs. It would mean that most of the classic Christian teachings—Jesus’s deity,
atonement, and resurrection—are mistaken and based on legends.
As a student I was initially shaken by this. How could all of these prominent
scholars be wrong? Then, however, as I did my own firsthand research, I was
surprised at how little evidence there actually was for these historical
reconstructions. To my encouragement the evidence for this older, skeptical view
of the Bible has been crumbling steadily for the past thirty years, even as it has
been promoted by the popular media through books and movies such as The Da
Vinci Code.
Anne Rice was one person who was startled to discover how weak the case
for a merely human “historical Jesus” really is. Rice became famous as the
author of Interview with the Vampire and other works that could be called
“horror-erotica.” Raised a Catholic, she lost her faith at a secular college,
married an atheist, and became wealthy writing novels about Lestat, who is both
a vampire and a rock star. It shocked the literary and media world when Rice
announced that she had returned to Christianity.
Why did she do it? In the afterword to her new novel, Christ the Lord: Out
of Egypt, she explained that she had begun doing extensive research about the
historical Jesus by reading the work of Jesus scholars at the most respected
academic institutions. Their main thesis was that the Biblical documents we have
aren’t historically reliable. She was amazed at how weak their arguments were.
Some books were no more than assumptions piled on assumptions….
Conclusions were reached on the basis of little or no data at all…. The whole
case for the nondivine Jesus who stumbled into Jerusalem and somehow got
crucified…that whole picture which had floated around the liberal circles I

frequented as an atheist for thirty years—that case was not made. Not only was
it not made, I discovered in this field some of the worst and most biased
scholarship I’d ever read.1
The Christian faith requires belief in the Bible.2 This is a big stumbling
block for many. I meet many New Yorkers for the first time after they have been
invited to one of Redeemer’s services. The centerpiece of each service is a
sermon based on a text of the Bible. The average visitor is surprised or even
shocked to find us listening to the Bible so carefully. Most would say that they
know there are many great stories and sayings in the Bible, but today “you can’t
take it literally.” What they mean is that the Bible is not entirely trustworthy
because some parts—maybe many or most parts—are scientifically impossible,
historically unreliable, and culturally regressive. We looked at the first of these
issues, of science and the Bible, in the previous chapter. Now we will look at the
other two.
“We Can’t Trust the Bible Historically”
It is widely believed that the Bible is a historically unreliable collection of
legends. A highly publicized forum of scholars, “the Jesus Seminar,” has stated
that no more than 20 percent of Jesus’s sayings and actions in the Bible can be
historically validated.3 How do we respond to this? It is beyond the range of this
book to examine the historic accuracy of each part of the Bible. Instead, we will
ask whether we can trust the gospels, the New Testament accounts of Jesus’s life,
to be historically reliable.4 By this I mean the “canonical” gospels—Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John—that the church recognized very early on as authentic
and authoritative.
It is often asserted that the New Testament gospels were written so many
years after the events happened that the writers’ accounts of Jesus’s life can’t be
trusted—that they are highly embellished if not wholly imagined. Many believe
that the canonical gospels were only four out of scores of other texts and that
they were written to support the church hierarchy’s power while the rest
(including the so-called “Gnostic gospels”) were suppressed. This belief has
been given new plausibility in the popular imagination by the bestselling book
The Da Vinci Code. In this novel, the original Jesus is depicted as a great but
clearly human teacher who many years after his death was made into a

resurrected God by church leaders who did so to gain status in the Roman
empire.5 However, there are several good reasons why the gospel accounts
should be considered historically reliable rather than legends.6
The timing is far too early for the gospels to be legends.
The canonical gospels were written at the very most forty to sixty years after
Jesus’s death.7 Paul’s letters, written just fifteen to twenty-five years after the
death of Jesus, provide an outline of all the events of Jesus’s life found in the
gospels—his miracles, claims, crucifixion, and resurrection. This means that the
Biblical accounts of Jesus’s life were circulating within the lifetimes of hundreds
who had been present at the events of his ministry. The gospel author Luke
claims that he got his account of Jesus’s life from eyewitnesses who were still
alive (Luke 1:1-4).
In his landmark book Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, Richard Bauckham
marshals much historical evidence to demonstrate that at the time the gospels
were written there were still numerous well-known living eyewitnesses to
Jesus’s teaching and life events. They had committed them to memory and they
remained active in the public life of the churches throughout their lifetimes,
serving as ongoing sources and guarantors of the truth of those accounts.
Bauckham uses evidence within the gospels themselves to show that the gospel
writers named their eyewitness sources within the text to assure readers of their
accounts’ authenticity.
Mark, for example, says that the man who helped Jesus carry his cross to
Calvary “was the father of Alexander and Rufus” (Mark 15:21). There is no
reason for the author to include such names unless the readers know or could
have access to them. Mark is saying, “Alexander and Rufus vouch for the truth
of what I am telling you, if you want to ask them.” Paul also appeals to readers
to check with living eyewitnesses if they want to establish the truth of what he is
saying about the events of Jesus’s life (1 Corinthians 15:1-6).8 Paul refers to a
body of five hundred eyewitnesses who saw the risen Christ at once. You can’t
write that in a document designed for public reading unless there really were
surviving witnesses whose testimony agreed and who could confirm what the
author said. All this decisively refutes the idea that the gospels were anonymous,
collective, evolving oral traditions. Instead they were oral histories taken down
from the mouths of the living eyewitnesses who preserved the words and deeds

of Jesus in great detail.
It is not only Christ’s supporters who were still alive. Also still alive were
many bystanders, officials, and opponents who had actually heard him teach,
seen his actions, and watched him die. They would have been especially ready to
challenge any accounts that were fabricated. For a highly altered, fictionalized
account of an event to take hold in the public imagination it is necessary that the
eyewitnesses (and their children and grandchildren) all be long dead. They must
be off the scene so they cannot contradict or debunk the embellishments and
falsehoods of the story. The gospels were written far too soon for this to occur.
It would have been impossible, then, for this new faith to spread as it did had
Jesus never said or done the things mentioned in the gospel accounts. Paul could
confidently assert to government officials that the events of Jesus’s life were
public knowledge: “These things were not done in a corner,” he said to King
Agrippa (Acts 26:26). The people of Jerusalem had been there—they had been
in the crowds that heard and watched Jesus. The New Testament documents
could not say Jesus was crucified when thousands of people were still alive who
knew whether he was or not. If there had not been appearances after his death, if
there had not been an empty tomb, if he had not made these claims, and these
public documents claimed they happened, Christianity would never have gotten
off the ground. The hearers would have simply laughed at the accounts.
The four canonical gospels were written much earlier than the so-called
Gnostic gospels. The Gospel of Thomas, the best known of the Gnostic
documents, is a translation from the Syriac, and scholars have shown that the
Syriac traditions in Thomas can be dated to 175 A.D. at the earliest, more than a
hundred years after the time that the canonical gospels were in widespread use.9
Adam Gopnik in The New Yorker wrote that the Gnostic gospels were so late
that they “…no more challenge the basis of the Church’s faith than the discovery
of a document from the nineteenth century written in Ohio and defending King
George would be a challenge to the basis of American democracy.”10 The
gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, however, were recognized as
authoritative eyewitness accounts almost immediately, and so we have Irenaeus
of Lyons in 160 A.D. declaring that there were four, and only four, gospels. The
widespread idea, promoted by The Da Vinci Code, that the Emperor Constantine
determined the New Testament canon, casting aside the earlier and supposedly
more authentic Gnostic gospels, simply is not true.11

As for The Da Vinci Code, people know the book and the movie plot is
fictitious, but many find plausible the historical background that the author, Dan
Brown, claims is true. The bestseller depicts Constantine in 325 A.D. as decreeing
Jesus’s divinity and suppressing all the evidence that he was just a human
teacher. Even in a document like Paul’s letter to the Philippians, however, which
all historians date at no more than twenty years after the death of Christ, we see
that Christians were worshipping Jesus as God (Philippians 2). Belief in the
deity of Christ was part of the dynamic from the beginning in the growth of the
early Christian church. One historian comments:
[Dan Brown says] that the Emperor Constantine imposed a whole new
interpretation on Christianity at the Council of Nicea in 325. That is, he decreed
the belief in Jesus’ divinity and suppressed all evidence of his humanity. This
would mean Christianity won the religious competition in the Roman Empire by
an exercise of power rather than by any attraction it exerted. In actual historical
fact, the Church had won that competition long before that time, before it had
any power, when it was still under sporadic persecution. If a historian were
cynical, you would say Constantine chose Christianity because it had already
won and he wanted to back a winner.12
The content is far too counterproductive for the gospels to be legends.
The working theory of many people today is that the gospels were written by the
leaders of the early church to promote their policies, consolidate their power, and
build their movement. That theory does not fit at all with what we actually find
in the gospels.
If this popular view is correct, we would expect to see many places in the
gospels where Jesus takes sides in debates that were going on in the early
church. That is how (it is reasoned) the gospels were shaped by Christian leaders
to support their party. However, we do not find this. We know, for example, that
one of the great controversies in the earliest church was that some believed
Gentile Christians should be required to be circumcised. In light of that great
conflict, it is remarkable that nowhere in the gospel accounts does Jesus say
anything about circumcision. The most likely reason that Jesus is silent about
circumcision is that the early church did not feel free to fabricate things and put
words in Jesus’s mouth that he didn’t utter.

Why would the leaders of the early Christian movement have made up the
story of the crucifixion if it didn’t happen? Any listener of the gospel in either
Greek or Jewish culture would have automatically suspected that anyone who
had been crucified was a criminal, whatever the speaker said to the contrary.
Why would any Christian make up the account of Jesus asking God in the
garden of Gethsemane if he could get out of his mission? Or why ever make up
the part on the cross when Jesus cries out that God had abandoned him? These
things would have only offended or deeply confused first-century prospective
converts. They would have concluded that Jesus was weak and failing his God.
Why invent women as the first witnesses of the resurrection in a society where
women were assigned such low status that their testimony was not admissible
evidence in court?13 It would have made far more sense (if you were inventing
the tale) to have male pillars of the community present as witnesses when Jesus
came out of the tomb. The only plausible reason that all of these incidents would
be included in these accounts is that they actually happened.
Also, why constantly depict the apostles—the eventual leaders of the early
Church—as petty and jealous, almost impossibly slow-witted, and in the end as
cowards who either actively or passively failed their master? Richard Bauckham
makes similar arguments about the depiction of Peter’s denial of Jesus, even to
the point of his calling down a curse on his master (Mark 14:71). Why would
anyone in the early church want to play up the terrible failures of their most
prominent leader? No one would have made such a story up, and even though it
is true, Bauckham reasons that no one but Peter himself would have dared to
recount it unless Peter himself was the source and had authorized its preservation
and propagation.14
Again, a comparison with the “Gnostic gospels” is illuminating. The gospel
of Thomas and similar documents express a philosophy called “Gnosticism,” in
which the material world is a dark, evil place from which our spirits need to be
rescued by secret illumination, or “gnosis.” This fits in very well with the
worldview of the Greeks and Romans but is utterly different than that of the
first-century Jewish world of which Jesus was part.15 Contrary, then, to The Da
Vinci Code and similar accounts, it is not the canonical gospels that “suck up” to
the “powers that be” in the ancient world, but it is the Gnostic texts that do it. It
was the canonical gospels, with their positive view of material creation and their
emphasis on the poor and the oppressed that offended the dominant views of the
Greco-Roman world. The canonical gospels not only give us a far more
historically credible picture of what the original Jesus was really like, but they

boldly challenge the worldview of their Greek and Roman readers.
The literary form of the gospels is too detailed to be legend.
C. S. Lewis was a world-class literary critic. When reading the gospels, he
noted:
I have been reading poems, romances, vision literature, legends, and myths all
my life. I know what they are like. I know none of them are like this. Of this
[gospel] text there are only two possible views. Either this is reportage…or else,
some unknown [ancient] writer…without known predecessors or successors,
suddenly anticipated the whole technique of modern novelistic, realistic
narrative…16
Lewis meant that ancient fiction was nothing like modern fiction. Modern
fiction is realistic. It contains details and dialogue and reads like an eyewitness
account. This genre of fiction, however, only developed within the last three
hundred years. In ancient times, romances, epics, or legends were high and
remote—details were spare and only included if they promoted character
development or drove the plot. That is why if you are reading Beowulf or The
Iliad you don’t see characters noticing the rain or falling asleep with a sigh. In
modern novels, details are added to create the aura of realism, but that was never
the case in ancient fiction.
The gospel accounts are not fiction. In Mark 4, we are told that Jesus was
asleep on a cushion in the stern of a boat. In John 21 we are told that Peter was a
hundred yards out in the water when he saw Jesus on the beach. He then jumped
out of the boat and together they caught 153 fish. In John 8, as Jesus listened to
the men who caught a woman in adultery, we are told he doodled with his finger
in the dust. We are never told what he was writing or why he did it. None of
these details are relevant to the plot or character development at all. If you or I
were making up an exciting story about Jesus, we would include such remarks
just to fill out the story’s air of realism. But that kind of fictional writing was
unknown in the first century. The only explanation for why an ancient writer
would mention the cushion, the 153 fish, and the doodling in the dust is because
the details had been retained in the eyewitnesses’ memory.
Richard Bauckham has compiled a great deal of research by psychologists

on the marks of recollective memory. He looks at the marks of eyewitness
accounts of events and how they differ from speculative or fictional accounts, or
of composite historical reconstructions. Recollective memory is selective—it
fixes on unique and consequential events, it retains irrelevant detail (as Lewis
observes), it takes the limited vantage point of a participant rather than that of an
omniscient narrator, and it shows signs of frequent rehearsal.17 Bauckham then
shows these same marks in the gospel narratives. Vivid and important events can
stay with you for decades if frequently rehearsed and/or retold. Factor in the fact
that disciples in the ancient world were expected to memorize masters’
teachings, and that many of Jesus’s statements are presented in a form that was
actually designed for memorization, and you have every reason to trust the
accounts.
Bauckham also looks to anthropology for evidence that the gospel writers
did not feel free to embellish or fabricate words or events in the life of Jesus.
Critical scholars from earlier in the twentieth century assumed the early
Christians would have used a relatively fluid process for transmitting popular
folktales and that they would have felt free to change the tales from the past in
order to correspond to their present realities and situation. Bauckham, however,
cites Jan Vansina’s study of oral traditions in primitive African cultures, in which
fictional legends and historical accounts are clearly distinguished from each
other and much greater care is taken to preserve historical accounts accurately.
This finding undermines a hundred years of critical gospel scholarship.
Gospels scholars, from the form critics onward, [believed] that early Christians
in the transmission of Jesus traditions would not have made any distinction
between the past time of the history of Jesus and their own present because oral
societies do not make such distinctions. This is untrue.18
As I write today, there seems to be a flood of what David Van Biema of Time
magazine calls “Biblical revisionism” following in the footsteps of Dan Brown
and The Da Vinci Code. He refers to the recent claim that Jesus’s tomb has been
found, and that he married Mary Magdalene and had children. Other scholars
have published books claiming similar new insights from the Gnostic gospels.
More seem sure to come. Van Biema quotes Publishers Weekly senior religion
editor Lynn Garrett, who speaks of what she calls “the Da Vinci Code effect”:
“Speculative histories were out there before Dan Brown wrote,” says Garrett.
“But they didn’t make the bestseller lists and their authors didn’t go on The

Daily Show.”19
All these revisionist histories completely ignore the growing body of careful
scholarship that shows there were a very large number of eyewitnesses to Jesus’s
life who lived on for years. As British scholar Vincent Taylor famously
remarked, if the skeptics about the Bible are right, “the disciples must have been
translated into heaven immediately after the resurrection.”20 That is the only way
that legendary elements could have come into the story of Jesus by the time the
gospels were written, but that did not happen. So, ironically, as the popular
media is promoting accounts of Jesus’s life based on the highly skeptical Biblical
scholarship that arose a century ago, the actual foundations of that scholarship
are eroding fast.21
“We can’t trust the Bible culturally.”
When I first came to New York City almost twenty years ago, the main problem
people had with the Bible was in the areas just discussed—science and history.
Today things have shifted somewhat. I find more people now especially upset by
what they call the outmoded and regressive teaching of the Bible. It seems to
support slavery and the subjugation of women. These positions appear so
outrageous to contemporary people that they have trouble accepting any other
parts of the Bible’s message.
In the early days of Redeemer I spent a lot of time with people who were
reading the Bible for the first time. As a result I was constantly responding to
people who were choking on some particularly indigestible verse. I remember
one black-clad young artist who came up to me after a service. He had just
discovered the verse “slaves obey your masters” (Ephesians 6:5ff.) and was
almost apoplectic. Here’s how I advised him and other people on how to deal
with a Scripture text that appeared objectionable or offensive to them.
Many people simply run viscerally from any consideration of the Bible once
they find such a Biblical passage. I counsel them instead to slow down and try
out several different perspectives on the issues that trouble them. That way they
can continue to read, learn, and profit from the Bible even as they continue to
wrestle with some of its concepts.
One possibility I urge them to consider is that the passage that bothers them

might not teach what it appears to them to be teaching. Many of the texts people
find offensive can be cleared up with a decent commentary that puts the issue
into historical context. Take the text “slaves obey your masters.” The average
reader today immediately and understandably thinks of the African slave trade of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, or of the human trafficking and sexual
slavery practiced in many places today. We then interpret the texts to teach that
such slavery is permissible, even desirable.
This is a classic case of ignoring the cultural and historical distance between
us and the writer and readers of the original text. In the first-century Roman
empire, when the New Testament was written, there was not a great difference
between slaves and the average free person. Slaves were not distinguishable
from others by race, speech, or clothing. They looked and lived like most
everyone else, and were not segregated from the rest of society in any way. From
a financial standpoint, slaves made the same wages as free laborers, and
therefore were not usually poor. Also, slaves could accrue enough personal
capital to buy themselves out. Most important of all, very few slaves were slaves
for life. Most could reasonably hope to be manumitted within ten or fifteen
years, or by their late thirties at the latest.22
By contrast, New World slavery was much more systematically and
homogeneously brutal. It was “chattel” slavery, in which the slave’s whole
person was the property of the master—he or she could be raped or maimed or
killed at the will of the owner. In the older bond-service or indentured
servanthood, only slaves’ productivity—their time and skills—were owned by
the master, and only temporarily. African slavery, however, was race-based, and
its default mode was slavery for life. Also, the African slave trade was begun
and resourced through kidnapping. The Bible unconditionally condemns
kidnapping and trafficking in slaves (1 Timothy 1:9-11; cf. Deuteronomy 24:7).
Therefore, while the early Christians did not go on a campaign to abolish firstcentury slavery completely, later Christians did so when faced with New World–
style slavery, which could not be squared in any way with Biblical teaching.23
Some texts may not teach what they at first appear to teach. Some people,
however, have studied particular Biblical texts carefully and come to understand
what they teach, and yet they still find them outrageous and regressive. What
should they do then?
I urge people to consider that their problem with some texts might be based

on an unexamined belief in the superiority of their historical moment over all
others. We must not universalize our time any more than we should universalize
our culture. Think of the implication of the very term “regressive.” To reject the
Bible as regressive is to assume that you have now arrived at the ultimate
historic moment, from which all that is regressive and progressive can be
discerned. That belief is surely as narrow and exclusive as the views in the Bible
you regard as offensive.
Consider the views of contemporary British people and how they differ from
the views of their ancestors, the Anglo-Saxons, a thousand years ago. Imagine
that both are reading the Bible and they come to the gospel of Mark, chapter 14.
First they read that Jesus claims to be the Son of Man, who will come with
angels at the end of time to judge the whole world according to his righteousness
(verse 62). Later they read about Peter, the leading apostle, who denies his
master three times and at the end even curses him to save his skin (verse 71). Yet
later Peter is forgiven and restored to leadership (Mark 16:7; John 21:15ff.). The
first story will make contemporary British people shudder. It sounds so
judgmental and exclusive. However, they will love the story about how even
Peter can be restored and forgiven. The first story will not bother the AngloSaxons at all. They know all about Domesday, and they are glad to get more
information about it! However, they will be shocked at the second story.
Disloyalty and betrayal at Peter’s level must never be forgiven, in their view. He
doesn’t deserve to live, let alone become the foremost disciple. They will be so
appalled by this that they will want to throw the Bible down and read no more of
it.
Of course, we think of the Anglo-Saxons as primitive, but someday others
will think of us and our culture’s dominant views as primitive. How can we use
our time’s standard of “progressive” as the plumbline by which we decide which
parts of the Bible are valid and which are not? Many of the beliefs of our
grandparents and great-grandparents now seem silly and even embarrassing to
us. That process is not going to stop now. Our grandchildren will find many of
our views outmoded as well. Wouldn’t it be tragic if we threw the Bible away
over a belief that will soon look pretty weak or wrong? To stay away from
Christianity because part of the Bible’s teaching is offensive to you assumes that
if there is a God he wouldn’t have any views that upset you. Does that belief
make sense?
I have one more bit of advice to people struggling with some of the Bible’s

teaching. We should make sure we distinguish between the major themes and
message of the Bible and its less primary teachings. The Bible talks about the
person and work of Christ and also about how widows should be regarded in the
church. The first of these subjects is much more foundational. Without it the
secondary teachings don’t make sense. We should therefore consider the Bible’s
teachings in their proper order.
Let’s take a hot issue today as a good example. If you say, “I can’t accept
what the Bible says about gender roles,” you must keep in mind that Christians
themselves differ over what some texts mean, as they do about many, many other
things. However, they all confess in the words of the Apostle’s Creed that Jesus
rose from the dead on the third day. Don’t worry about gender roles until you
figure out what you think about the central teachings of the faith.
You may appeal, “But I can’t accept the Bible if what it says about gender is
outmoded.” I would respond to that with this question—are you saying that
because you don’t like what the Bible says about sex that Jesus couldn’t have
been raised from the dead? I’m sure you wouldn’t insist on such a non sequitur.
If Jesus is the Son of God, then we have to take his teaching seriously, including
his confidence in the authority of the whole Bible. If he is not who he says he is,
why should we care what the Bible says about anything else?
Think of it like this. If you dive into the shallow end of the Biblical pool,
where there are many controversies over interpretation, you may get scraped up.
But if you dive into the center of the Biblical pool, where there is consensus—
about the deity of Christ, his death and resurrection—you will be safe. It is
therefore important to consider the Bible’s core claims about who Jesus is and
whether he rose from the dead before you reject it for its less central and more
controversial teachings.
A Trustworthy Bible or a Stepford God?
If we let our unexamined beliefs undermine our confidence in the Bible, the cost
may be greater than we think.
If you don’t trust the Bible enough to let it challenge and correct your
thinking, how could you ever have a personal relationship with God? In any
truly personal relationship, the other person has to be able to contradict you. For
example, if a wife is not allowed to contradict her husband, they won’t have an

intimate relationship. Remember the (two!) movies The Stepford Wives? The
husbands of Stepford, Connecticut, decide to have their wives turned into robots
who never cross the wills of their husbands. A Stepford wife was wonderfully
compliant and beautiful, but no one would describe such a marriage as intimate
or personal.
Now, what happens if you eliminate anything from the Bible that offends
your sensibility and crosses your will? If you pick and choose what you want to
believe and reject the rest, how will you ever have a God who can contradict
you? You won’t! You’ll have a Stepford God! A God, essentially, of your own
making, and not a God with whom you can have a relationship and genuine
interaction. Only if your God can say things that outrage you and make you
struggle (as in a real friendship or marriage!) will you know that you have gotten
hold of a real God and not a figment of your imagination. So an authoritative
Bible is not the enemy of a personal relationship with God. It is the precondition
for it.

INTERMISSION

Come, let us argue it out.
—Isaiah 1:18

INTERMISSION means literally to be between journeys or missions. That is
where we are now. Underlying all doubts about Christianity are alternate beliefs,
unprovable assumptions about the nature of things. So far I’ve examined the
beliefs beneath the seven biggest objections or doubts people in our culture have
about the Christian faith. I respect much of the reasoning behind them, but in the
end I don’t believe any of them make the truth of Christianity impossible or even
improbable. We have another journey to take, however. It is one thing to argue
that there are no sufficient reasons for disbelieving Christianity. It is another to
argue that there are sufficient reasons for believing it. That is what I will try to
do in the last part of this volume.
“Wait,” someone should ask. “You are going to give us sufficient grounds
for believing Christianity? How do you define Christianity? And how do you
define ‘sufficient’?” Let’s take these questions in order.
Which Christianity?
From the outside the various Christian churches and traditions can look
extremely different, almost like distinct religions. This is partially because the
public worship services look so different. It is also because, as I said in Chapter
3, Christianity is the faith that is most spread across the cultures and regions of

the world. Therefore it has assumed an enormous number of different cultural
forms. Another reason that Christians look so different from one another is the
great theological rifts that have occurred over the centuries. The first great
division was between the eastern Greek and western Roman church in the
eleventh century. Today these are known as the Eastern Orthodox and Roman
Catholic churches. The second great schism was within the Western church,
between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism.
All Christians who take truth and doctrine seriously will agree that these
differences between churches are highly significant. They make a major
difference in how one’s faith is held and practiced. Nevertheless, all Orthodox,
Catholic, and Protestant Christians assent together to the great creeds of the first
thousand years of church history, such as the Apostle’s, Nicene, Chalcedonian,
and Athanasian creeds. In these creeds the fundamental Christian view of reality
is laid out. There is the classical expression of the Christian understanding of
God as three-in-one. Belief in the Trinity creates a profoundly different view of
the world from that of polytheists, non-Trinitarian monotheists, and atheists, as I
will show in Chapter 13. There is also a strong statement of the full deity and
humanity of Jesus Christ in these creeds. Christians, therefore, do not look upon
Jesus as one more teacher or prophet, but as Savior of the world. These teachings
make Christians far more like than unlike one another.
What is Christianity? For our purposes, I’ll define Christianity as the body of
believers who assent to these great ecumenical creeds. They believe that the
triune God created the world, that humanity has fallen into sin and evil, that God
has returned to rescue us in Jesus Christ, that in his death and resurrection Jesus
accomplished our salvation for us so we can be received by grace, that he
established the church, his people, as the vehicle through which he continues his
mission of rescue, reconciliation, and salvation, and that at the end of time Jesus
will return to renew the heavens and the earth, removing all evil, injustice, sin,
and death from the world.
All Christians believe all this—but no Christians believe just this. As soon as
you ask “How does the church act as vehicle for Jesus’s work in the world?” and
“How does Jesus’s death accomplish our salvation?” and “How are we received
by grace?” Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant Christians will give you different
answers. Despite the claims of many to be such, there are no truly “generic”
nondenominational Christians. Everyone has to answer these “how” questions in
order to live a Christian life, and those answers immediately put you into one

tradition and denomination or another.
It is important for readers to understand this. I am making a case in this book
for the truth of Christianity in general—not for one particular strand of it. Some
sharp-eyed Presbyterian readers will notice that I am staying quiet about some of
my particular theological beliefs in the interest of doing everything I can to
represent all Christians. Yet when I come to describe the Christian gospel of sin
and grace, I will necessarily be doing it as a Protestant Christian, and I won’t be
sounding notes that a Catholic author would sound.
Which Rationality?
I want to show that there are sufficient reasons for believing Christianity.
Prominent disbelievers in Christianity today—Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett,
Sam Harris, and Christopher Hitchens—insist that sufficient reasons do not exist
for the existence of God. Dawkins, for example, says that the claim of God’s
existence is a scientific hypothesis that should be open to rational
demonstration.1 He and his co-skeptics want a logical or empirical argument for
God that is airtight and therefore convinces almost everyone. They won’t believe
in God until they get it.
Is there anything wrong with that? I think so. These authors are evaluating
Christian arguments by what some have called “strong rationalism.”2 Its
proponents laid down what was called the “verification principle,” namely, that
no one should believe a proposition unless it can be proved rationally by logic or
empirically by sense experience.3 What is meant by the word “proved”? Proof,
in this view, is an argument so strong that no person whose logical faculties are
operating properly would have any reason for disbelieving it. Atheists and
agnostics ask for this kind of “proof” for God, but are not alone in holding to
strong rationalism. Many Christians claim that their arguments for faith are so
strong that all who reject them are simply closing their minds to the truth out of
fear or stubbornness.4
Despite all the books calling Christians to provide proofs for their beliefs,
you won’t see philosophers doing so, not even the most atheistic. The great
majority think that strong rationalism is nearly impossible to defend.5 To begin
with, it can’t live up to its own standards. How could you empirically prove that
no one should believe something without empirical proof? You can’t, and that

reveals it to be, ultimately, a belief.6 Strong rationalism also assumes that it is
possible to achieve “the view from nowhere,” a position of almost complete
objectivity, but virtually all philosophers today agree that is impossible. We
come to every individual evaluation with all sorts of experiences and
background beliefs that strongly influence our thinking and the way our reason
works. It is not fair, then, to demand an argument that all rational people would
have to bow to.
The philosopher Thomas Nagel is an atheist, but in his book The Last Word
he admits that he can’t come to the question of God in anything like a detached
way. He confesses that he has “fear of religion,” and he doubts that anyone can
address this issue without very powerful motives for seeing the arguments go
one way or the other.
I am talking of…the fear of religion itself. I speak from experience, being
strongly subject to this fear myself: I want atheism to be true…. It isn’t just that I
don’t believe in God and, naturally, hope that I’m right in my belief. It’s that I
hope there is no God! I don’t want there to be a God: I don’t want the universe to
be like that…. I am curious whether there is anyone who is genuinely indifferent
as to whether there is a God—anyone who, whatever his actual belief about the
matter, doesn’t particularly want either one of the answers to be correct.7
Imagine a judge who comes to a case in which one of the parties is a
company in which she has a heavy financial investment. Because she has a deep
desire to see the case go in a particular way, she will recuse herself from sitting
in judgment on the case. Nagel is saying that when it comes to God, we are all
like the judge. Depending on our experiences with religion, on our other beliefs
and commitments, and on how we are living our lives—we all are deeply
interested in seeing the case for God go one way or the other. The trouble is, we
can’t recuse ourselves. Because he rejects strong rationalism, Nagel has, despite
his skepticism, wonderful respect toward belief and religion. He differs
markedly from the tone and stance of writers like Dawkins and Harris.
The philosophical indefensibility of “strong rationalism” is the reason that
the books by Dawkins and Dennett have been getting such surprisingly rough
treatment in scholarly journals. As just one example, the Marxist scholar Terry
Eagleton wrote a scathing review of Richard Dawkins’s The God Delusion in the
London Review of Books. Eagleton attacks both of Dawkins’s naive ideas,

namely that faith has no rational component, and that reason isn’t based to a
great degree on faith.
Dawkins considers that all faith is blind faith, and that Christian and Muslim
children are brought up to believe unquestioningly. Not even the dim-witted
clerics who knocked me about at grammar school thought that. For mainstream
Christianity, reason, argument and honest doubt have always played an integral
role in belief…. Reason, to be sure, doesn’t go all the way down for believers, but
it doesn’t for most sensitive, civilized non-religious types either. Even Richard
Dawkins lives more by faith than by reason. We hold many beliefs that have no
unimpeachably rational justification, but are nonetheless reasonable to
entertain….8
If we reject strong rationalism, are we then stuck in relativism—without any
way to judge one set of beliefs from another? Not at all. In Chapters 2 and 3 I
argued that complete relativism is impossible to maintain.9 The approach I will
take in the rest of this volume is called “critical rationality.”10 It assumes that
there are some arguments that many or even most rational people will find
convincing, even though there is no argument that will be persuasive to everyone
regardless of viewpoint. It assumes that some systems of belief are more
reasonable than others, but that all arguments are rationally avoidable in the end.
That is, you can always find reason to escape it that is not sheer bias or
stubbornness. Nevertheless, this doesn’t mean that we can’t evaluate beliefs,
only that we should not expect conclusive proof, and to demand it is unfair. Not
even scientists proceed that way.
Scientists are very reluctant to ever say that a theory is “proved.” Even
Richard Dawkins admits that Darwin’s theory cannot be finally proven, that
“new facts may come to light which will force our successors…to abandon
Darwinism or modify it beyond recognition.”11 But that doesn’t mean that
science cannot test theories and find some far more empirically verifiable than
others. A theory is considered empirically verified if it organizes the evidence
and explains phenomena better than any conceivable alternative theory. That is,
if, through testing, it leads us to expect with accuracy many and varied events
better than any other rival account of the same data, then it is accepted, though
not (in the strong rationalist sense) “proved.”
In Is There a God? Oxford philosopher Richard Swinburne argues

powerfully that belief in God can be tested and justified (but not proven) in the
same way.12 The view that there is a God, he says, leads us to expect the things
we observe—that there is a universe at all, that scientific laws operate within it,
that it contains human beings with consciousness and with an indelible moral
sense. The theory that there is no God, he argues, does not lead us to expect any
of these things. Therefore, belief in God offers a better empirical fit, it explains
and accounts for what we see better than the alternative account of things. No
view of God can be proven, but that does not mean that we cannot sift and weigh
the grounds for various religious beliefs and find that some or even one is the
most reasonable.
God the Playwright
I don’t want anyone to think that I am adopting “critical rationality” as some sort
of second best, however. If the God of the Bible really does exist, “critical
rationality” would be exactly the way we ought to approach the question of his
being and existence.
When a Russian cosmonaut returned from space and reported that he had not
found God, C. S. Lewis responded that this was like Hamlet going into the attic
of his castle looking for Shakespeare. If there is a God, he wouldn’t be another
object in the universe that could be put in a lab and analyzed with empirical
methods. He would relate to us the way a playwright relates to the characters in
his play. We (characters) might be able to know quite a lot about the playwright,
but only to the degree the author chooses to put information about himself in the
play. Therefore, in no case could we “prove” God’s existence as if he were an
object wholly within our universe like oxygen and hydrogen or an island in the
Pacific.
Lewis gives us another metaphor for knowing the truth about God when he
writes that he believes in God “as I believe the sun has risen, not only because I
see it, but because by it I see everything else.”13 Imagine trying to look directly
at the sun in order to learn about it. You can’t do it. It will burn out your retinas,
ruining your capacity to take it in. A far better way to learn about the existence,
power, and quality of the sun is to look at the world it shows you, to recognize
how it sustains everything you see and enables you to see it.
Here, then, we have a way forward. We should not try to “look into the sun,”

as it were, demanding irrefutable proofs for God. Instead we should “look at
what the sun shows us.” Which account of the world has the most “explanatory
power” to make sense of what we see in the world and in ourselves? We have a
sense that the world is not the way it ought to be. We have a sense that we are
very flawed and yet very great. We have a longing for love and beauty that
nothing in this world can fulfill. We have a deep need to know meaning and
purpose. Which worldview best accounts for these things?
Christians do not claim that their faith gives them omniscience or absolute
knowledge of reality. Only God has that. But they believe that the Christian
account of things—creation, fall, redemption, and restoration—makes the most
sense of the world. I ask you to put on Christianity like a pair of spectacles and
look at the world with it. See what power it has to explain what we know and
see.
If the God of the Bible exists, he is not a man in the attic, but the Playwright.
That means we won’t be able to find him like we would find a passive object
with the powers of empirical investigation. Rather, we must find the clues to his
reality that he has written into the universe, including into us. That is why, if
God exists, we would expect to find that he appeals to our rational faculties. If
we were made “in his image” as rational, personal beings, there should be some
resonance between his mind and ours. It also means that reason alone won’t be
enough. The Playwright can only be known through personal revelation. That is
why we have to take a look at what the Bible says about God and the human
condition.
In the Christian view, however, the ultimate evidence for the existence of
God is Jesus Christ himself. If there is a God, we characters in his play have to
hope that he put some information about himself in the play. But Christians
believe he did more than give us information. He wrote himself into the play as
the main character in history, when Jesus was born in a manger and rose from
the dead. He is the one with whom we have to do.

PART 2

THE REASONS FOR FAITH

EIGHT

THE CLUES OF GOD

If one puts aside the existence of God and the survival after life as too doubtful…
one has to make up one’s mind as to the use of life. If death ends all, if I have
neither to hope for good nor to fear evil, I must ask myself what I am here for,
and how in these circumstances I must conduct myself. Now the answer is plain,
but so unpalatable that most will not face it. There is no meaning for life, and
[thus] life has no meaning.
—Somerset Maugham, The Summing Up
It was true, I had always realized it—I hadn’t any “right” to exist at all. I had
appeared by chance, I existed like a stone, a plant, a microbe. I could feel
nothing to myself but an inconsequential buzzing. I was thinking…that here we
are eating and drinking, to preserve our precious existence, and that there’s
nothing, nothing, absolutely no reason for existing.
—Jean-Paul Sartre, Nausea

HOW can we believe in Christianity if we don’t even know whether God
exists? Though there cannot be irrefutable proof for the existence of God, many
people have found strong clues for his reality—divine fingerprints—in many
places.
I once met regularly with a brilliant young scientist who was haunted by a
general sense that God existed. Much of what I am writing in this chapter and
the next I discovered during my conversations with him. He looked at one
argument for God after another, and though many of them had a great deal of
merit, he found that ultimately every one of them was rationally avoidable at
some point. This troubled him greatly. “I can’t believe unless I find at least one
absolutely airtight proof for God,” he said to me. I pointed out to him that he was
assuming “strong rationalism” and he got some relief when together we realized

that he had no airtight proof for that. Then we began to go back and review the
lines of reasoning that he had been calling “proofs” and began to look at them
instead as clues. When we went about it with that perspective he began to see
that, cumulatively, the clues of God had a lot of force to them.
The philosopher Alvin Plantinga believes that there are no proofs of God
that will convince all rational persons. However, he believes that there are at
least two to three dozen very good arguments for the existence of God.1 Most
readers who take the time to think through Plantinga’s list will find some items
compelling and others not. However, the accumulated weight of the ones you
find appealing can be very formidable. I will trace out just a handful of them.
The Mysterious Bang
Those of a more rational mind-set have always been fascinated by the question,
“Why is there something rather than nothing?” This question has become even
more interesting to people in the wake of the Big Bang theory. There’s evidence
that the universe is expanding explosively and outwardly from a single point.
Stephen Hawking wrote: “Almost everyone now believes that the universe, and
time itself, had a beginning at the Big Bang.”2 Scientist Francis Collins puts this
clue in layman’s language in his book The Language of God:
We have this very solid conclusion that the universe had an origin, the Big Bang.
Fifteen billion years ago, the universe began with an unimaginably bright flash
of energy from an infinitesimally small point. That implies that before that, there
was nothing. I can’t imagine how nature, in this case the universe, could have
created itself. And the very fact that the universe had a beginning implies that
someone was able to begin it. And it seems to me that had to be outside of
nature.3
Everything we know in this world is “contingent,” has a cause outside of
itself. Therefore the universe, which is just a huge pile of such contingent
entities, would itself have to be dependent on some cause outside of itself.
Something had to make the Big Bang happen—but what? What could that be but
something outside of nature, a supernatural, noncontingent being that exists from
itself.

Sam Harris, in his review of Francis Collins’s book, makes the classic
objection to this line of reasoning. “In any case,” he writes, “even if we accepted
that our universe simply had to be created by an intelligent being, this would not
suggest that this being is the God of the Bible.”4 That is perfectly right. If we are
looking at this as an argument proving the existence of a personal God, it doesn’t
get us all the way there. However, if we are looking for a clue—a clue that there
is something besides the natural world—it is very provocative for many people.
The Cosmic Welcome Mat
For organic life to exist, the fundamental regularities and constants of physics—
the speed of light, the gravitational constant, the strength of the weak and strong
nuclear forces—must all have values that together fall into an extremely narrow
range. The probability of this perfect calibration happening by chance is so tiny
as to be statistically negligible.5 Again, Collins puts it well:
When you look from the perspective of a scientist at the universe, it looks as if it
knew we were coming. There are 15 constants—the gravitational constant,
various constants about the strong and weak nuclear force, etc.—that have
precise values. If any one of those constants was off by even one part in a
million, or in some cases, by one part in a million million, the universe could not
have actually come to the point where we see it. Matter would not have been
able to coalesce, there would have been no galaxy, stars, planets or people.6
Some have said that it is as if there were a large number of dials that all had
to be tuned to within extremely narrow limits—and they were. It seems
extremely unlikely that this would happen by chance. Stephen Hawking
concludes: “The odds against a universe like ours emerging out of something
like the Big Bang are enormous. I think there are clearly religious implications.”
Elsewhere he says, “It would be very difficult to explain why the universe would
have begun in just this way except as the act of a God who intended to create
beings like us.”7
This has been called the “Fine-Tuning Argument” or the “Anthropic
Principle,” namely that the universe was prepared for human beings. As an
argument it must be a pretty powerful one, because there are a lot of fierce
rebuttals being published about it. The most common rejoinder, which Richard

Dawkins makes in his book The God Delusion, is that there may be trillions of
universes. Given the enormous number of universes existing over enormous
amounts of time and space, it is inevitable that some of them are fine-tuned to
sustain our kind of life. The one we are in is one, so here we are.8
Again, as a “proof,” the Fine-Tuning Argument is rationally avoidable.
Though there’s not a shred of proof that there are many universes, there’s also no
way to prove that there aren’t.
However, as a clue, this line of thinking has force. Alvin Plantinga gives this
illustration. He imagines a man dealing himself twenty straight hands of four
aces in the same game of poker. As his companions reach for their six-shooters
the poker player says, “I know it looks suspicious! But what if there is an infinite
succession of universes, so that for any possible distribution of poker hands,
there is one universe in which this possibility is realized? We just happen to find
ourselves in one where I always deal myself four aces without cheating!”9 This
argument will have no effect on the other poker players. It is technically possible
that the man just happened to deal himself twenty straight hands of four aces.
Though you could not prove he had cheated, it would be unreasonable to
conclude that he hadn’t.
The philosopher John Leslie poses a similar illustration. He imagines a man
who is sentenced to be executed by a firing squad consisting of fifty expert
marksmen.10 They all fire from six feet away and not one bullet hits him. Since
it is possible that even expert marksmen could miss from close range it is
technically possible that all fifty just happened to miss at the same moment.
Though you could not prove they had conspired to miss, it would be
unreasonable to draw the conclusion that they hadn’t.
It is technically possible that we just happened to be in the one universe in
which organic life occurred. Though you could not prove that the fine-tuning of
the universe was due to some sort of design, it would be unreasonable to draw
the conclusion that it wasn’t. Although organic life could have just happened
without a Creator, does it make sense to live as if that infinitely remote chance is
true?
The Regularity of Nature

There is something about nature that is much more striking and inexplicable than
its design. All scientific, inductive reasoning is based on the assumption of the
regularity (the “laws”) of nature, that water will boil tomorrow under the
identical conditions of today. The method of induction requires generalizing
from observed cases to all cases of the same kind. Without inductive reasoning
we couldn’t learn from experience, we couldn’t use language, we couldn’t rely
on our memories.
Most people find that normal and untroubling. But not philosophers! David
Hume and Bertrand Russell, as good secular men, were troubled by the fact that
we haven’t got the slightest idea of why nature-regularity is happening now, and
moreover we haven’t the slightest rational justification for assuming it will
continue tomorrow. If someone would say, “Well the future has always been like
the past in the past,” Hume and Russell reply that you are assuming the very
thing you are trying to establish. To put it another way, science cannot prove the
continued regularity of nature, it can only take it on faith.
There have been many scholars in the last decades who have argued that
modern science arose in its most sustained form out of Christian civilization
because of its belief in a all-powerful, personal God who created and sustains an
orderly universe.11 As a proof for the existence of God, the regularity of nature is
escapable. You can always say, “We don’t know why things are as they are.” As
a clue for God, however, it is helpful.
The Clue of Beauty
Arthur C. Danto, the art critic at The Nation, once described a work of art that
gave him a sense of “obscure but inescapable meaning.”12 In other words, while
great art does not “hit you over the head” with a simple message, it always gives
you a sense that life is not a “tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing.” It fills you with hope and gives you the strength to carry on,
though you cannot define what it is that moves you.
Leonard Bernstein once rhapsodized about the effect of Beethoven on him:
Beethoven…turned out pieces of breath-taking rightness. Rightness—that’s the
word! When you get the feeling that whatever note succeeds the last is the only
possible note that can rightly happen at that instant, in that context, then

chances are you’re listening to Beethoven. Melodies, fugues, rhythms—leave
them to the Tchaikovskys and Hindemiths and Ravels. Our boy has the real
goods, the stuff from Heaven, the power to make you feel at the finish:
Something is right in the world. There is something that checks throughout, that
follows its own law consistently: something we can trust, that will never let us
down.13
If there is no God, and everything in this world is the product of (as Bertrand
Russell famously put it) “an accidental collocation of atoms,” then there is no
actual purpose for which we were made—we are accidents. If we are the product
of accidental natural forces, then what we call “beauty” is nothing but a
neurological hardwired response to particular data. You only find certain scenery
to be beautiful because you had ancestors who knew you would find food there
and they survived because of that neurological feature and now we have it too.
In the same way, though music feels significant, that significance is an illusion.
Love too must be seen in this light. If we are the result of blind natural forces,
then what we call “love” is simply a biochemical response, inherited from
ancestors who survived because this trait helped them survive.
Bernstein and Danto are testifying to the fact that even though we as secular
people believe that beauty and love are just biochemical responses, in the
presence of great art and beauty we inescapably feel that there is real meaning in
life, there is truth and justice that will never let us down, and love means
everything. Notice that Bernstein, though by no means an orthodox religious
person, can’t refrain from even using the term “Heaven” when talking about
Beethoven. We may, therefore, be secular materialists who believe truth and
justice, good and evil, are complete illusions. But in the presence of art or even
great natural beauty, our hearts tell us another story.
Another prominent artist who is apparently telling us the same thing is John
Updike. In his short story “Pigeon Feathers” a young teenager says to this
mother, “Don’t you see, if when we die there’s nothing, all your sun and fields
and what not are all, ah, horror? It’s just an ocean of horror.” Later, in the
presence of the beauty of pigeon feathers, of their texture and color, he is
overwhelmed by a certainty that there is a God behind the world who will allow
him to live for eternity.14 Updike seems to be saying that regardless of the beliefs
of our mind about the random meaninglessness of life, before the face of beauty
we know better.

“So what?” someone might object. “Just because we feel something is true
doesn’t make it so!” Are we, however, only talking about feelings here? What is
evoked in these experiences is, more accurately, appetite or desire. Goethe refers
to this as selige sehnsucht—blessed longing. We not only feel the reality but also
the absence of what we long for.
St. Augustine in his Confessions reasoned that these unfulfillable desires are
clues to the reality of God. How so? Indeed (as it was just objected) just because
we feel the desire for a steak dinner doesn’t mean we will get it. However, while
hunger doesn’t prove that the particular meal desired will be procured, doesn’t
the appetite for food in us mean that food exists? Isn’t it true that innate desires
correspond to real objects that can satisfy them, such as sexual desire
(corresponding to sex), physical appetite (corresponding to food), tiredness
(corresponding to sleep), and relational desires (corresponding to friendship)?
Doesn’t the unfulfillable longing evoked by beauty qualify as an innate
desire? We have a longing for joy, love, and beauty that no amount or quality of
food, sex, friendship, or success can satisfy. We want something that nothing in
this world can fulfill. Isn’t that at least a clue that this “something” that we want
exists?15 This unfulfillable longing, then, qualifies as a deep, innate human
desire, and that makes it a major clue that God is there.16
The Clue-Killer
In our culture there is a very influential school of thought that claims to have the
answers to all of these so-called clues. This is the school of evolutionary biology
that claims everything about us can be explained as a function of natural
selection. A book that seeks to explain all clues about God in this way is
Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon by Daniel Dennett.
Dennett claims that if we have religious feelings it is only because those traits
once helped certain people survive their environment in greater numbers and
therefore passed that genetic code on to us. He sums up his view when he writes:
Everything we value—from sugar and sex and money to music and love and
religion—we value for reasons. Lying behind, and distinct from, our reasons are
evolutionary reasons, free-floating rationales that have been endorsed by
natural selection.17

In The New York Times Magazine, Robin Marantz Henig surveyed what
evolutionists think about religion in an article, “Why Do We Believe? How
Evolutionary Science Explains Faith in God.”18 We know that “the idea of an
infallible God is comfortable and familiar, something children readily accept.”19
Why? Some evolutionists such as David Sloan Wilson think belief in God made
people happier and more unselfish, which meant their families and tribes
survived and they got better mates. Others such as Scott Atran and Richard
Dawkins posit that belief in God is an accidental by-product of other traits that
did give adaptive advantage. Our ancestors who survived were most prone to
detect agents in the brush even when they weren’t there, and were most likely to
impose narratives, causal reasoning, on everything that happened around them.
However, these same traits make us more likely to believe in God—to see agents
and narratives and intelligences where they don’t actually exist.20
Despite fierce debates within the field, evolutionary theorists all agree that
our capacity to believe in God is hardwired into our physiology because it was
directly or indirectly associated with traits that helped our ancestors adapt to
their environment. That’s why arguments for God appeal to so many of us.
That’s all there is to it. The clues are clues to nothing.
However, there are many who believe not only that the clue-killer argument
has a fatal contradiction in it, but that it actually points to another clue for God.
In the last part of Dawkins’s The God Delusion he admits that since we are
the product of natural selection, we can’t completely trust our own senses. After
all, evolution is interested only in preserving adaptive behavior, not true belief.21
In the New York Times Magazine article, another scientist says, “In some
circumstances a symbolic belief that departs from factual reality fares better.”22
In other words, paranoid false beliefs are often more effective at helping you
survive than accurate ones.
I don’t believe Dawkins or other evolutionary theorists realize the full
implications of this crucial insight. Evolution can only be trusted to give us
cognitive faculties that help us live on, not to provide ones that give us an
accurate and true picture of the world around us.23 Patricia Churchland puts it
like this:
The principle chore of [brains] is to get the body parts where they should be in

order that the organism may survive. Improvements in sensorimotor control
confer an evolutionary advantage: a fancier style of representing [the world] is
advantageous so long as it…enhances the organism’s chances for survival.
Truth, whatever that is, takes the hindmost.24
Thomas Nagel, the prominent philosopher and atheist, agrees in the last
chapter of his book The Last Word. He writes that to be sure my mind is telling
me what is really, truly out there in the world, I must “follow the rules of logic
because they are correct—not merely because I am biologically programmed to
do so.” However, according to evolutionary biology laws of reason would have
to make sense to us only because they help us survive, not because they
necessarily tell us truth. So, Nagel asks:
[Can we have any] continued confidence in reason as a source of knowledge
about the nonapparent character of the world? In itself, I believe an
evolutionary story [of the human race] tells against such confidence.25
Evolutionists say that if God makes sense to us, it is not because he is really
there, it’s only because that belief helped us survive and so we are hardwired for
it. However, if we can’t trust our belief-forming faculties to tell us the truth
about God, why should we trust them to tell us the truth about anything,
including evolutionary science? If our cognitive faculties only tell us what we
need to survive, not what is true, why trust them about anything at all?
It seems that evolutionary theorists have to do one of two things. They could
backtrack and admit that we can trust what our minds tell us about things,
including God. If we find arguments or clues to God’s existence that seem
compelling to us, well, maybe he’s really there. Or else they could go forward
and admit that we can’t trust our minds about anything. What is not fair is to do
what so many evolutionary scientists are doing now. They are applying the
scalpel of their skepticism to what our minds tell us about God but not to what
our minds are telling us about evolutionary science itself.
This is a huge Achilles’ heel in the whole enterprise of evolutionary biology
and theory. Alvin Plantinga points out that Charles Darwin himself saw this
major vulnerability. To a friend, Darwin wrote that:

the horrid doubt always arises whether the convictions of man’s mind, which has
been developed from the mind of the lower animals, are of any value or at all
trustworthy.26
Plantinga then proceeds to argue that it is ultimately irrational to accept
evolutionary “naturalism,” the theory that everything in us is caused only by
natural selection. If it were true, we couldn’t trust the methods by which we
arrived at it or any scientific theory at all.27
People like Dawkins hold that there is a conflict between science and religion…
the truth of the matter, however, is that the conflict is between science and
naturalism, not between science and belief in God…. It’s as likely, given
unguided evolution, that we live in a sort of dream world as that we actually
know something about ourselves and our world.28
Despite popular books like those of Dennett, Dawkins, and Harris, which try
to use the evolutionary clue-killer on religion, more and more thinkers are seeing
through it, and not just orthodox believers, but those like Thomas Nagel. Leon
Wieseltier, the literary editor of The New Republic, points out the flaw in the
clue-killer argument in his review of Dennett’s book Breaking the Spell.
[Dennett] portrays reason in service to natural selection, and as a product of
natural selection. But if reason is a product of natural selection, then how much
confidence can we have in a rational argument for natural selection? The power
of reason is owed to the independence of reason, and to nothing else….
Evolutionary biology cannot invoke the power of reason even as it destroys it.29
It comes down to this: If, as the evolutionary scientists say, what our brains
tells us about morality, love, and beauty is not real—if it is merely a set of
chemical reactions designed to pass on our genetic code—then so is what their
brains tell them about the world. Then why should they trust them?
The Clue-Killer Is Really a Clue
I think that ultimately the supposed clue-killer ends up showing us one more

clue for God to put beside the others.
The first clue is the very existence of the world, the Big Bang. The secular
person rightly responds, “But that doesn’t prove God exists. Maybe the Big
Bang just caused itself.” The second clue is the fine-tuning of the universe, the
one-in-a-trillion-trillion chance that our universe supports organic and human
life. Again the secular person can very fairly respond: “But that doesn’t prove
God. It could be through sheer random circumstance that this universe is the one
that was formed.” Another clue is the regularity of nature. All scientific,
inductive reasoning is based on the assumption of this, though we haven’t the
slightest rational justification for assuming it will continue. When believers have
responded that this is a clue to God’s existence, nonbelievers retort, rightly, “We
don’t know why nature is regular, it just is. That doesn’t prove God.”
Another clue is the clue of beauty and meaning. If we are the product of the
meaningless, accidental forces of nature, believers ask, how do you account for
the sense we have that beauty matters, that love and life are significant? The
secular person responds: “This doesn’t prove God. We can explain all such
‘senses’ and convictions through evolutionary biology. Our religious, aesthetic,
and moral intuitions are there only because they helped our ancestors survive.”
However, as many thinkers point out, if this argument proves anything at all it
proves too much. If we can’t trust our belief-forming faculties in one area, we
should not trust them in any area. If there is no God, we should not trust our
cognitive faculties at all.
Oh, but we do, and that’s the final clue. If we believe God exists, then our
view of the universe gives us a basis for believing that cognitive faculties work,
since God could make us able to form true beliefs and knowledge. If we believe
in God, then the Big Bang is not mysterious, nor the fine-tuning of the universe,
nor the regularities of nature. All the things that we see make perfect sense.
Also, if God exists our intuitions about the meaningfulness of beauty and love
are to be expected.
If you don’t believe in God, not only are all these things profoundly
inexplicable, but your view—that there is no God—would lead you not to expect
them. Though you have little reason to believe your rational faculties work, you
go on using them. You have no basis for believing that nature will go on
regularly, but you continue to use inductive reasoning and language. You have
no good reason to trust your senses that love and beauty matter, but you keep on

doing it. C. S. Lewis puts this vividly:
You can’t, except in the lowest animal sense, be in love with a girl if you know
(and keep on remembering) that all the beauties both of her person and of her
character are a momentary and accidental pattern produced by the collision of
atoms, and that your own response to them is only a sort of psychic
phosphorescence arising from the behavior of your genes. You can’t go on
getting very serious pleasure from music if you know and remember that its air
of significance is a pure illusion, that you like it only because your nervous
system is irrationally conditioned to like it.30
Of course none of the clues we have been looking for actually proves God.
Every one of them is rationally avoidable. However, their cumulative effect is, I
think, provocative and potent. Though the secular view of the world is rationally
possible, it doesn’t make as much sense of all these things as the view that God
exists. That’s why we call them clues. The theory that there is a God who made
the world accounts for the evidence we see better than the theory that there is no
God. Those who argue against the existence of God go right on using induction,
language, and their cognitive faculties, all of which make far more sense in a
universe in which a God has created and supports them all by his power.
Beyond the Clues
I can imagine someone saying at this point, “So, it’s all inconclusive! All you are
saying is that, on the whole, God probably exists, but nobody can make an
airtight case. That means no one can know if there’s a God or not.”
I don’t agree.
In the next chapter I want to do something very personal. I don’t want to
argue why God may exist. I want to demonstrate that you already know that God
does exist. I’d like to convince the reader that, whatever you may profess
intellectually, belief in God is an unavoidable, “basic” belief that we cannot
prove but can’t not know. We know God is there. That is why even when we
believe with all our minds that life is meaningless, we simply can’t live that way.
We know better.

NINE

THE KNOWLEDGE of GOD

—Metropolitan (1990, USA, Whit Stillman)

CONSERVATIVE writers and speakers are constantly complaining that the
young people of our culture are relativistic and amoral. As a pastor in Manhattan
I have been neck-deep in sophisticated twentysomethings for almost two
decades, and I have not found this to be the case. The secular, young adults I
have known have a very finely honed sense of right and wrong. There are many
things happening in the world that evoke their moral outrage. There is a problem
with their moral outlook, however.

Free-Floating Morality
In many cases I have to put on my philosophy-professor hat in order to be a good
pastor to people. A young couple once came to me for some spiritual direction.
They “didn’t believe in much of anything” they said. How could they begin to
figure out if there even was a God? I asked them to tell me about something they
felt was really, really wrong. The woman immediately spoke out against
practices that marginalized women. I said I agreed with her fully since I was a
Christian who believed God made all human beings, but I was curious why she
thought it was wrong. She responded, “Women are human beings and human
beings have rights. It is wrong to trample on someone’s rights.” I asked her how
she knew that.
Puzzled, she said, “Everyone knows it is wrong to violate the rights of
someone.” I said, “Most people in the world don’t ‘know’ that. They don’t have
a Western view of human rights. Imagine if someone said to you ‘everyone
knows that women are inferior.’ You’d say, ‘That’s not an argument, it’s just an
assertion.’ And you’d be right. So let’s start again. If there is no God as you
believe and everyone has just evolved from animals, why would it be wrong to
trample on someone’s rights?” Her husband responded: “Yes, it is true we are
just bigger-brained animals, but I’d say animals have rights too. You shouldn’t
trample on their rights, either.” I asked whether he held animals guilty for
violating the rights of other animals if the stronger ones ate the weaker ones.
“No, I couldn’t do that.” So he only held human beings guilty if they trampled
on the weak? “Yes.” Why this double standard, I asked. Why did the couple
insist that human beings had to be different from animals, so that they were not
allowed to act as was natural to the rest of the animal world. Why did the couple
keep insisting that humans had this great, unique individual dignity and worth?
Why did they believe in human rights? “I don’t know,” the woman said, “I guess
they are just there, that’s all.”
The conversation was much more congenial than this very compressed
account conveys. The young couple laughed at the weakness of some of their
responses, which showed me that they were open to exploration and that
encouraged me to be more pointed than I would ordinarily have been. However,
this conversation reveals how our culture differs from all the others that have
gone before. People still have strong moral convictions, but unlike people in
other times and places, they don’t have any visible basis for why they find some
things to be evil and other things good. It’s almost like their moral intuitions are

free-floating in midair—far off the ground.
Polish poet Czeslaw Milosz spoke of this:
What has been surprising in the post–Cold War period are those beautiful and
deeply moving words pronounced with veneration in places like Prague and
Warsaw, words which pertain to the old repertory of the rights of man and the
dignity of the person. I wonder at this phenomenon because maybe underneath
there is an abyss. After all, those ideas had their foundation in religion, and I am
not over-optimistic about the survival of religion in a scientific-technological
civilization. Notions that seemed buried forever have suddenly been resurrected.
But how long can they stay afloat if the bottom is taken out?1
I don’t believe Milosz is right. I think that people will definitely go on
holding to their beliefs in human dignity even when conscious belief in God is
gone. Why is this the case? I have a radical thesis. I think people in our culture
know unavoidably that there is a God, but they are repressing what they know.
The Concept of Moral Obligation
It is common to hear people say, “No one should impose their moral views on
others, because everyone has the right to find truth inside him or herself.” This
belief leaves the speaker open to a series of very uncomfortable questions.
Aren’t there people in the world who are doing things you believe are wrong—
things that they should stop doing no matter what they personally believe about
the correctness of their behavior? If you do (and everyone does!), doesn’t that
mean you do believe that there is some kind of moral standard that people should
abide by regardless of their individual convictions? This raises a question. Why
is it impossible (in practice) for anyone to be a consistent moral relativist even
when they claim that they are? The answer is that we all have a pervasive,
powerful, and unavoidable belief not only in moral values but also in moral
obligation. Sociologist Christian Smith puts it like this:
“Moral”…is an orientation toward understandings about what is right and
wrong, just and unjust, that are not established by our own actual desires or
preferences but instead are believed to exist apart from them, providing
standards by which our desires and preferences can themselves be judged.2

All human beings have moral feelings. We call it a conscience. When
considering doing something that we feel would be wrong, we tend to refrain.
Our moral sense does not stop there, however. We also believe that there are
standards “that exist apart from us” by which we evaluate moral feelings. Moral
obligation is a belief that some things ought not to be done regardless of how a
person feels about them within herself, regardless of what the rest of her
community and culture says, and regardless of whether it is in her self-interest or
not. The young couple had no doubts that people in other cultures should honor
women’s rights, for example.
Though we have been taught that all moral values are relative to individuals
and cultures, we can’t live like that. In actual practice we inevitably treat some
principles as absolute standards by which we judge the behavior of those who
don’t share our values. What gives us the right to do that, if all moral beliefs are
relative? Nothing gives us the right. Yet we can’t stop it. People who laugh at the
claim that there is a transcendent moral order do not think that racial genocide is
just impractical or self-defeating, but that it is wrong. The Nazis who
exterminated Jews may have claimed that they didn’t feel it was immoral at all.
We don’t care. We don’t care if they sincerely felt they were doing a service to
humanity. They ought not to have done it.
We do not only have moral feelings, but we also have an ineradicable belief
that moral standards exist, outside of us, by which our internal moral feelings are
evaluated. Why? Why do we think those moral standards exist?
The Evolutionary Theory of Moral Obligation
A common answer today comes from what I called in the last chapter the “cluekiller,” sociobiology or evolutionary psychology. This view holds that altruistic
people, those who act unselfishly and cooperatively, survived in greater numbers
than those who were selfish and cruel. Therefore altruistic genes were passed
down to us and now the great majority of us feel that unselfish behavior is
“right.”
There are, however, many flaws in this theory, and it has been given some
devastating critiques.3 An individual’s self-sacrificing, altruistic behavior toward
his or her blood kin might result in a greater survival rate for the individual’s
family or extended clan, and therefore result in a greater number of descendants

with that person’s genetic material. For evolutionary purposes, however, the
opposite response—hostility to all people outside one’s group—should be just as
widely considered moral and right behavior. Yet today we believe that sacrificing
time, money, emotion, and even life—especially for someone “not of our kind”
or tribe—is right. If we see a total stranger fall in the river we jump in after him,
or feel guilty for not doing so. In fact, most people will feel the obligation to do
so even if the person in the water is an enemy. How could that trait have come
down by a process of natural selection? Such people would have been less likely
to survive and pass on their genes. On the basis of strict evolutionary naturalism
(the belief that everything about us is here because of a process of natural
selection) that kind of altruism should have died out of the human race long ago.
Instead, it is stronger than ever.
Other arguments to demonstrate the reproductive benefits of altruism have
also run into trouble. Some contend that altruistic behavior brings many indirect
reciprocal benefits to the practitioner from others, but this can’t account for our
motivation to practice such acts when no one knows about them. Others have
contended that sacrificial behavior benefits an entire group or society, enabling
the entire society to pass on its genetic code. However, there is consensus that
natural selection does not work on whole populations.4
Evolution, therefore, cannot account for the origin of our moral feelings, let
alone for the fact that we all believe there are external moral standards by which
moral feelings are evaluated.5
The Problem of Moral Obligation
This sense of moral obligation creates a problem for those with a secular
understanding of the world. Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban is an anthropologist whose
professional field is dominated by what she calls “cultural relativism”—a view
that all moral beliefs are culturally created (that is, we believe them because we
are part of a community that gives them plausibility) and that there is no basis
for objectively judging one culture’s morality to be better than another. Yet she
was appalled by practices in societies she was studying that oppressed women.
She decided that she should promote women’s interests in the societies wherever
she worked as an anthropologist.
This immediately created a conundrum for her. She knew that her belief in

women’s equality was rooted in a socially located (Northern European,
eighteenth century) individualistic mode of thought. What right did she have to
promote her views over those of the non-Western societies where she worked?
Her response:
Anthropologists continue to express strong support for cultural relativism. One
of the most contentious issues arises from the fundamental question: What
authority do we Westerners have to impose our own concept of universal rights
on the rest of humanity…. [But] the cultural relativists’ argument is often used by
repressive governments to deflect international criticism of their abuse of their
citizens…. I believe that we should not let the concept of relativism stop us from
using national and international forums to examine ways to protect the lives and
dignity of people in every culture…. When there is a choice between defending
human rights and defending cultural relativism, anthropologists should choose
to protect and promote human rights. We cannot just be bystanders.6
The author poses a difficult question: “If all cultures are relative, then so is
the idea of universal human rights, so how can I decide to impose my values on
this culture?” But she doesn’t answer her own question. She has just said that her
charge of oppression is based on a Western concept of individual freedom, but
she has no answer for this conundrum. She simply declares that women are
being oppressed and she feels she has to stop it. We have to bring our Western
values to these other nations. Our values are better than theirs. Period.
The Difficult Issue of Human Rights
Fluehr-Lobban is struggling with a major crisis in the field of human rights.
Jürgen Habermas has written that, despite their European origins, “human
rights” in Asia, Africa, and South America now “constitute the only language in
which the opponents and victims of murderous regimes and civil wars can raise
their voices against violence, repression, and persecution.”7 This reveals the
enormous importance of the morality of human rights, which Michael J. Perry
defines as the twofold conviction that every human being has inherent dignity
and that it is obligatory that we order our lives in accordance with this fact. It is
wrong to violate the equal dignity of other human beings.8 But why should we
believe that? On what does this dignity depend?

In his essay “Where Do Rights Come From?”9 Harvard law professor Alan
Dershowitz lays out the possibilities. Some say human rights come from God. If
we were all created in God’s image, then every human being would be sacred
and inviolable. Dershowitz rejects this as an answer, since so many millions of
people are agnostic. Others say human rights come from nature, or what has
been called “natural law.” They argue that nature and human nature, if it is
examined, will reveal that some kinds of behavior are “fitting” with the way
things are, and are right. However, Dershowitz points out that nature thrives on
violence and predation, on the survival of the fittest. There is no way to derive
the concept of the dignity of every individual from the way things really work in
nature.
Another theory claims that human rights are created by us, the people who
write the laws. Many argue that it is in the interests of societies to create human
rights because honoring individual dignity means that in the long run everyone
in the community is better off. However, what if a majority decides it is not in
their interest to grant human rights? If rights are nothing but a majority creation
then there is nothing to appeal to when they are legislated out of existence.
Dershowitz, quoting Ronald Dworkin, argues that this third view of human
rights is inadequate:
It is no answer to say that if individuals have these rights then the community is
better off in the long run…because when we say someone has a right to speak his
mind freely, we mean he is entitled to do so even if this would not be in the
general interest.
If human rights are created by majorities, of what use are they? Their value
lies in that they can be used to insist that majorities honor the dignity of
minorities and individuals despite their conception of their “greater good.”
Rights cannot be created—they must be discovered, or they are of no value. As
Dworkin concludes, if we want to defend individual rights, we must try to
discover something beyond utility that argues for these rights.10
What could that “something” be? Neither Dworkin nor Dershowitz can
really give an answer. Dworkin ends up appealing to a form of majority rule
anyway. In Life’s Dominion: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and
Individual Freedom (1995), he writes:

The life of a single human organism commands respect and protection…because
of our wonder at the…processes that produce new lives from old ones…. The
nerve of the sacred lies in the value we attach to a process or enterprise or
project rather than to its results considered independently from how they were
produced….11
Law professor Michael J. Perry responds:
The nonreligious source of normativity, for Dworkin, is the great value “we”
attach to every human being understood as a creative masterpiece; it is “our”
wonder at the processes that produce new lives from old ones…. But to whom is
Dworkin referring with his “we” and “our”? Did the Nazis value the Jews
intrinsically? The conspicuous problem with Dworkin’s…secular argument [for
rights] is that Dworkin assumes a consensus among human agents that does not
exist and never has existed.12
Perry’s new book, Toward a Theory of Human Rights, is very significant.
Perry concludes that though it is clear “there is a religious ground for the
morality of human rights…It is far from clear that there is a non-religious
ground,13 a secular ground, for human rights.”14 Perry lays out Nietzsche’s wellknown insistence that, if God is dead, any and all morality of love and human
rights is baseless. If there is no God, argues Nietzsche, Sartre, and others, there
can be no good reason to be kind, to be loving, or to work for peace. Perry
quotes Philippa Foot who says that secular thinkers accepted the idea that there
is no God and no given meaning to human life, but have not “really joined battle
with Nietzsche about morality. By and large we have just gone on taking moral
judgments for granted as if nothing had happened.”15 Why do we keep on doing
this?
The Grand “Sez Who?”
The reason is laid out in a classic essay by late Yale law professor Arthur Leff.
Most people feel that human rights are not created by us but are found by us, that
they are there and must be honored by majorities, whether they like them or not.
But, Leff says:

When would it be impermissible to make the formal intellectual equivalent of
what is known in barrooms and schoolyards as “the grand Sez Who”? In the
absence of God…each…ethical and legal system…will be differentiated by the
answer it chooses to give to one key question: who among us… ought to be able
to declare “law” that ought to be obeyed? Stated that baldly, the question is so
intellectually unsettling that one would expect to find a noticeable number of
legal and ethical thinkers trying not to come to grips with it…. Either God exists
or He does not, but if He does not, nothing and no one else can take His
place….16
If there is no God, then there is no way to say any one action is “moral” and
another “immoral” but only “I like this.” If that is the case, who gets the right to
put their subjective, arbitrary moral feelings into law? You may say “the
majority has the right to make the law,” but do you mean that then the majority
has the right to vote to exterminate a minority? If you say “No, that is wrong,”
then you are back to square one. “Who sez” that the majority has a moral
obligation not to kill the minority? Why should your moral convictions be
obligatory for those in opposition? Why should your view prevail over the will
of the majority? The fact is, says Leff, if there is no God, then all moral
statements are arbitrary, all moral valuations are subjective and internal, and
there can be no external moral standard by which a person’s feelings and values
are judged. Yet Leff ends this intellectual essay in a most shocking way:
As things are now, everything is up for grabs. Nevertheless: napalming babies is
bad. Starving the poor is wicked. Buying and selling each other is depraved….
There is such a thing as evil. All together now: Sez Who? God help us.
Nietzsche, of course, understood this. “The masses blink and say: ‘We are all
equal—Man is but man, before God we are all equal.’ Before God! But now this
God has died.”17 Raimond Gaita, an atheist thinker, reluctantly writes:
Only someone who is religious can speak seriously of the sacred…. We may say
that all human beings are inestimably precious, that they are ends in themselves,
that they are owed unconditional respect, that they possess inalienable rights,
and, of course, that they possess inalienable dignity. In my judgment these are
ways of trying to say what we feel a need to say when we are estranged from the
conceptual resources [i.e. God] we need to say it…. Not one of [these statements

about human beings] has the power of the religious way of speaking…that we
are sacred because God loves us, his children.18
Leff is not simply concluding that there is no basis for human rights without
God. He is also pointing out (as are Dershowitz and Dworkin, in their own way)
that despite the fact that we can’t justify or ground human rights in a world
without God, we still know they exist. Leff is not just speaking generically, but
personally. Without God he can’t justify moral obligation, and yet he can’t not
know it exists.
The Argument for God from the Violence of Nature
Why would we know this? To sharpen our focus on the significance of this
indelible knowledge of moral obligation, consider the observations of writer
Annie Dillard. Dillard lived for a year by a creek in the mountains of Virginia
expecting to be inspired and refreshed by closeness to “nature.” Instead, she
came to realize that nature was completely ruled by one central principle—
violence by the strong against the weak.
There is not a person in the world that behaves as badly as praying mantises.
But wait, you say, there is no right or wrong in nature; right and wrong is a
human concept! Precisely! We are moral creatures in an amoral world…. Or
consider the alternative…it is only human feeling that is freakishly amiss…. All
right then—it is our emotions that are amiss. We are freaks, the world is fine,
and let us all go have lobotomies to restore us to a natural state. We can leave…
lobotomized, go back to the creek, and live on its banks as untroubled as any
muskrat or reed. You first.19
Annie Dillard saw that all of nature is based on violence. Yet we inescapably
believe it is wrong for stronger human individuals or groups to kill weaker ones.
If violence is totally natural why would it be wrong for strong humans to trample
weak ones? There is no basis for moral obligation unless we argue that nature is
in some part unnatural. We can’t know that nature is broken in some way unless
there is some supernatural standard of normalcy apart from nature by which we
can judge right and wrong. That means there would have to be heaven or God or
some kind of divine order outside of nature in order to make that judgment.

There is only one way out of this conundrum. We can pick up the Biblical
account of things and see if it explains our moral sense any better than a secular
view. If the world was made by a God of peace, justice, and love, then that is
why we know that violence, oppression, and hate are wrong. If the world is
fallen, broken, and needs to be redeemed, that explains the violence and disorder
we see.
If you believe human rights are a reality, then it makes much more sense that
God exists than that he does not. If you insist on a secular view of the world and
yet you continue to pronounce some things right and some things wrong, then I
hope you see the deep disharmony between the world your intellect has devised
and the real world (and God) that your heart knows exists. This leads us to a
crucial question. If a premise (“There is no God”) leads to a conclusion you
know isn’t true (“Napalming babies is culturally relative”) then why not change
the premise?
The Endless, Pointless Litigation of Existence
I have not tried to prove the existence of God to you. My goal has been to show
you that you already know God is there. To some degree I have been treating the
nonexistence of God as an intellectual problem, but it is much more than that. It
not only makes all moral choices meaningless, but it makes all life meaningless
too. The playwright Arthur Miller reveals this vividly through the character
Quentin in After the Fall. Quentin says:
For many years I looked at life like a case at law. It was a series of proofs. When
you’re young you prove how brave you are, or smart; then, what a good lover;
then, a good father; finally, how wise, or powerful or [whatever.] But underlying
it all, I see now, there was a presumption. That one moved…on an upward path
toward some elevation, where…God knows what…I would be justified, or even
condemned. A verdict anyway. I think now that my disaster really began when I
looked up one day…and the bench was empty. No judge in sight. And all that
remained was the endless argument with oneself, this pointless litigation of
existence before an empty bench…. Which, of course, is another way of saying—
despair.20
What is he saying? We all live as if it is better to seek peace instead of war,

to tell the truth instead of lying, to care and nurture rather than to destroy. We
believe that these choices are not pointless, that it matters which way we choose
to live. Yet if the Cosmic Bench is truly empty, then “who sez” that one choice is
better than the others? We can argue about it, but it’s just pointless arguing,
endless litigation. If the Bench is truly empty, then the whole span of human
civilization, even if it lasts a few million years, will be just an infinitesimally
brief spark in relation to the oceans of dead time that preceded it and will follow
it. There will be no one around to remember any of it. Whether we are loving or
cruel in the end would make no difference at all.21
Once we realize this situation there are two options. One is that we can
simply refuse to think out the implications of all this. We can hold on to our
intellectual belief in an empty Bench and yet live as if our choices are
meaningful and as if there is a difference between love and cruelty. Why would
we do that? A cynic might say that this is a way of “having one’s cake and eating
it, too.” That is, you get the benefit of having a God without the cost of
following him. But there is no integrity in that.
The other option is to recognize that you do know there is a God. You could
accept the fact that you live as if beauty and love have meaning, as if there is
meaning in life, as if human beings have inherent dignity—all because you know
God exists. It is dishonest to live as if he is there and yet fail to acknowledge the
one who has given you all these gifts.

TEN

THE PROBLEM OF SIN

Can we doubt that presently our race will more than realize our boldest
imaginations, that it will achieve unity and peace, and that our children will live
in a world made more splendid and lovely than any palace or garden that we
know, going on from strength to strength in an ever-widening circle of
achievement? What man has done, the little triumphs of his present state…form
but the prelude to the things that man has yet to do.
—H. G. Wells, A Short History of the World (1937)
The cold-blooded massacres of the defenseless, the return of deliberate and
organized torture, mental torment, and fear to a world from which such things
had seemed well nigh banished—has come near to breaking my spirit
altogether…“Homo Sapiens,” as he has been pleased to call himself, is played
out.
—H. G. Wells, A Mind at the End of Its Tether (1946)

IT is hard to avoid the conclusion that there is something fundamentally wrong
with the world. According to Christianity our biggest problem is sin. Yet the
concept of “sin” is offensive or ludicrous to many. This is often because we
don’t understand what Christians mean by the term.
Sin and Human Hope
Many have the impression that the Christian doctrine of sin is bleak and
pessimistic about human nature. Nothing could be further from the truth. When I
was brand-new in the ministry a young man came to see me whose wife had just
left him. He was feeling angry at what she had done, guilty over his own flaws
that had led her to do it, and despondent before the whole situation. I said that

what he needed more than anything was hope. He quickly agreed and asked how
he could get some. As gently as possible I said that the good news was—he was
a sinner. Because he was a sinner he wasn’t simply the helpless victim of
psychological drives or social systems. Years later I came across a passage in a
sermon by Barbara Brown Taylor, who said more eloquently what I tried to say
that day.
Neither the language of medicine nor of law is adequate substitute for the
language of [sin.] Contrary to the medical model, we are not entirely at the
mercy of our maladies. The choice is to enter into the process of repentance.
Contrary to the legal model, the essence of sin is not [primarily] the violation of
laws but a wrecked relationship with God, one another, and the whole created
order. “All sins are attempts to fill voids,” wrote Simone Weil. Because we
cannot stand the God-shaped hole inside of us, we try stuffing it full of all sorts
of things, but only God may fill [it].1
Andrew Delbanco is a humanities professor at Columbia University. Some
years ago he was doing research on Alcoholics Anonymous and was attending
AA meetings around the country. One Saturday morning in a New York City
church basement he was listening to a “crisply dressed young man” who was
talking about his problems. In his narrative he was absolutely faultless. All his
mistakes were due to the injustice and betrayals of others. He spoke of how he
was going to avenge himself on all who had wronged him. “His every gesture
gave the impression of grievously wounded pride,” Delbanco wrote. It was clear
that the young man was trapped in his need to justify himself, and that things
could only get worse and worse in his life until he recognized this. While he was
speaking, a black man in his forties, in dreadlocks and dark shades, leaned over
to Delbanco and said, “I used to feel that way too, before I achieved low selfesteem.” Delbanco wrote later in his book, The Real American Dream: A
Meditation on Hope:
This was more than a good line. For me it was the moment I understood in a new
way the religion I had claimed to know something about. As the speaker
bombarded us with phrases like “got to take control of my life,” and “I’ve got to
really believe in myself”—the man beside me took refuge in the old Calvinist
doctrine that pride is the enemy of hope. What he meant by his joke about selfesteem was that he learned no one can save himself by dint of his own efforts. He

thought the speaker was still lost—lost in himself, but without knowing it.2
By “low self-esteem” the man in the dreadlocks did not mean the young man
should come to hate himself. He meant that the well-dressed young man was
“lost in himself” until he could admit he was a very flawed human being, a
sinner. He would never be liberated to see his own flaws in their true light, to
forgive those who had wronged him, or to humbly seek and receive forgiveness
from others. The Christian doctrine of sin, properly understood, can be a great
resource for human hope, but what is that doctrine?
The Meaning of Sin
The famous Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard wrote a fascinating little
book called The Sickness Unto Death in 1849. In it he defined “sin” in a way
that is rooted in the Bible but also is accessible to contemporary people. “Sin is:
in despair not wanting to be oneself before God…. Faith is: that the self in being
itself and wanting to be itself is grounded transparently in God.”3 Sin is the
despairing refusal to find your deepest identity in your relationship and service
to God. Sin is seeking to become oneself, to get an identity, apart from him.
What does this mean? Everyone gets their identity, their sense of being
distinct and valuable, from somewhere or something. Kierkegaard asserts that
human beings were made not only to believe in God in some general way, but to
love him supremely, center their lives on him above anything else, and build
their very identities on him. Anything other than this is sin.
Most people think of sin primarily as “breaking divine rules,” but
Kierkegaard knows that the very first of the Ten Commandments is to “have no
other gods before me.” So, according to the Bible, the primary way to define sin
is not just the doing of bad things, but the making of good things into ultimate
things. It is seeking to establish a sense of self by making something else more
central to your significance, purpose, and happiness than your relationship to
God.
In the movie Rocky, the title character’s girlfriend asks him why it is so
important for him to “go the distance” in the boxing match. “Then I’ll know I’m
not a bum,” he replies. In the movie Chariots of Fire one of the main characters
explains why he works so hard at running the hundred-yard dash for the

Olympics. He says that when each race begins, “I have ten lonely seconds to
justify my existence.” Both of these men looked to athletic achievement as the
defining force that gave meaning to their lives.
Ernest Becker won the Pulitzer Prize for his book The Denial of Death. He
begins it by noting that a child’s need for self-worth “is the condition for his
life,” so much so that every person is desperately seeking what Becker calls
“cosmic significance.” He immediately warns the reader not to take this term
lightly.4 Our need for worth is so powerful that whatever we base our identity
and value on we essentially “deify.” We will look to it with all the passion and
intensity of worship and devotion, even if we think of ourselves as highly
irreligious. He uses romantic love as an illustration:
The self-glorification that [modern man] needed in his innermost nature he now
looked for in the love partner. The love partner becomes the divine ideal within
which to fulfill one’s life. Spiritual and moral needs now become focused on one
individual.5
Becker is not saying that everyone looks to romance and love for a sense of
self. Many look not to romance but rather to work and career for cosmic
significance:
[Sometimes] his work has to carry the burden of justifying him. What does
“justifying” mean?…He lives the fantasy of the control of life and death, of
destiny.6
But all this only sets the stage for continual disappointment:
No human relationship can bear [this] burden of godhood…. If your partner is
your “All” then any shortcoming in him becomes a major threat to you…. What
is it that we want when we elevate the love partner to this position? We want to
be rid of…our feeling of nothingness…to know our existence has not been in
vain. We want redemption—nothing less. Needless to say, humans cannot give
this.7
This is exactly Kierkegaard’s point. Every person must find some way to

“justify their existence,” and to stave off the universal fear that they’re “a bum.”
In more traditional cultures, the sense of worth and identity comes from
fulfilling duties to family and giving service to society. In our contemporary
individualistic culture, we tend to look to our achievements, our social status,
our talents, or our love relationships. There are an infinite variety of identitybases. Some get their sense of “self” from gaining and wielding power, others
from human approval, others from self-discipline and control. But everyone is
building their identity on something.8
The Personal Consequences of Sin
Defining sin this way, we can see several ways that sin destroys us personally.
Identity apart from God is inherently unstable. Without God, our sense of worth
may seem solid on the surface, but it never is—it can desert you in a moment.
For example, if I build my identity on being a good parent, I have no true
“self”—I am just a parent, nothing more. If something goes wrong with my
children or my parenting, there is no “me” left. Theologian Thomas Oden writes:
Suppose my god is sex or my physical health or the Democratic Party. If I
experience any of these under genuine threat, then I feel myself shaken to the
depths. Guilt becomes neurotically intensified to the degree that I have idolized
finite values…. Suppose I value my ability to teach and communicate clearly….
If clear communication has become an absolute value for me, a center of value
that makes all my other values valuable…then if I [fail in teaching well] I am
stricken with neurotic guilt. Bitterness becomes neurotically intensified when
someone or something stands between me and something that is my ultimate
value.9
If anything threatens your identity you will not just be anxious but paralyzed
with fear. If you lose your identity through the failings of someone else you will
not just be resentful, but locked into bitterness. If you lose it through your own
failings, you will hate or despise yourself as a failure as long as you live. Only if
your identity is built on God and his love, says Kierkegaard, can you have a self
that can venture anything, face anything.
There is no way to avoid this insecurity outside of God. Even if you say, “I
will not build my happiness or significance on anyone or thing,” you will

actually be building your identity on your personal freedom and independence. If
anything threatens that, you will again be without a self.
An identity not based on God also leads inevitably to deep forms of
addiction. When we turn good things into ultimate things, we are, as it were,
spiritually addicted. If we take our meaning in life from our family, our work, as
cause, or some achievement other than God, they enslave us. We have to have
them. St. Augustine said that “our loves are not rightly ordered.” He famously
said to God, “Our hearts are restless until they find their rest in Thee!” If we try
to find our ultimate rest in anything else, our hearts become dislocated, “out of
joint.” The good things that enslave us are good things that deserve to be loved.
But when our heart loves become inordinate, then we fall into patterns of life
that are not unlike substance addiction. As in all addiction, we are in denial
about the degree to which we are controlled by our god-substitutes. And
inordinate love creates inordinate, uncontrollable anguish if anything goes wrong
with the object of our greatest hopes.
As a pastor at my first church in Hopewell, Virginia, I found myself
counseling two different women, both of whom were married, both of whom had
husbands who were poor fathers, and both of whom had teenage sons who were
beginning to get into trouble in school and with the law. Both of the women were
angry at their husbands. I advised them and talked (among other things) about
the problems of unresolved bitterness and the importance of forgiveness. Both
women agreed and sought to forgive. However, the woman who had the worst
husband and who was the least religious was able to forgive. The other woman
was not. This puzzled me for months until one day the unforgiving woman
blurted out, “Well, if my son goes down the drain then my whole life will have
been a failure!” She had centered her life on her son’s happiness and success.
That was why she couldn’t forgive.10
In Easter Everywhere: A Memoir, Darcey Steinke recounts how she, the
daughter of a Lutheran minister, left her Christian profession. Moving to New
York City she entered a life of club-hopping and sexual obsession. She wrote
several novels. She continued, however, to be extremely restless and unfulfilled.
In the middle of the book she quotes from Simone Weil to summarize the main
issue in her life. “One has only the choice between God and idolatry,” Weil
wrote. “If one denies God…one is worshiping some things of this world in the
belief that one sees them only as such, but in fact, though unknown to oneself
imagining the attributes of Divinity in them.”11

A life not centered on God leads to emptiness. Building our lives on
something besides God not only hurts us if we don’t get the desires of our hearts,
but also if we do. Few of us get all of our wildest dreams fulfilled in life, and
therefore it is easy to live in the illusion that if you were as successful, wealthy,
popular, or beautiful as you wished, you’d finally be happy and at peace. That
just isn’t so. In a Village Voice column, Cynthia Heimel thought back on all the
people she knew in New York City before they became famous movie stars. One
worked behind the makeup counter at Macy’s, one worked selling tickets at
movie theaters, and so on. When they became successful, every one of them
became more angry, manic, unhappy, and unstable than they had been when they
were working hard to get to the top. Why? Heimel writes:
That giant thing they were striving for, that fame thing that was going to make
everything OK, that was going to make their lives bearable, that was going to fill
them with ha-ha-happiness had happened, and the next day they woke up and
they were still them. The disillusionment turned them howling and insufferable.12
The Social Consequences of Sin
Sin does not only have an internal impact on us but also a devastating effect on
the social fabric. In the wake of World War II the English writer Dorothy Sayers
saw many British intellectual elites in despair about the direction of human
society. In her 1947 book Creed or Chaos? she proposed that their hopelessness
was largely due to their loss of belief in the Christian doctrine of “original” sin,
that is, humanity’s inherent pride and self-centeredness. “The people who are
most discouraged,” she wrote, “are those who cling to an optimistic belief in the
civilizing influence of progress and enlightenment.” To them, the genocide in
totalitarian states and the greed and selfishness of capitalist society “are not
merely shocking and alarming. For them, these things are the utter negation of
everything in which they have believed. It is as though the bottom had dropped
out of their universe.” Christians, however, are accustomed to the idea that
“there is a deep interior dislocation in the very center of human personality.” She
concluded:
The Christian dogma of the double nature in man—which asserts that man is
disintegrated and necessarily imperfect in himself and all his works, yet closely
related by a real unity of substance with an eternal perfection within and beyond

him—makes the present parlous state of human society seem less hopeless and
less irrational.13
In The Nature of True Virtue, one of the most profound treatises on social
ethics ever written, Jonathan Edwards lays out how sin destroys the social fabric.
He argues that human society is deeply fragmented when anything but God is
our highest love. If our highest goal in life is the good of our family, then, says
Edwards, we will tend to care less for other families. If our highest goal is the
good of our nation, tribe, or race, then we will tend to be racist or nationalistic. If
our ultimate goal in life is our own individual happiness, then we will put our
own economic and power interests ahead of those of others. Edwards concludes
that only if God is our summum bonum, our ultimate good and life center, will
we find our heart drawn out not only to people of all families, races, and classes,
but to the whole world in general.14
How does this destruction of social relationships flow from the internal
effects of sin? If we get our very identity, our sense of worth, from our political
position, then politics is not really about politics, it is about us. Through our
cause we are getting a self, our worth. That means we must despise and
demonize the opposition. If we get our identity from our ethnicity or
socioeconomic status, then we have to feel superior to those of other classes and
races. If you are profoundly proud of being an open-minded, tolerant soul, you
will be extremely indignant toward people you think are bigots. If you are a very
moral person, you will feel very superior to people you think are licentious. And
so on.
There is no way out of this conundrum. The more we love and identify
deeply with our family, our class, our race, or our religion, the harder it is to not
feel superior or even hostile to other religions, races, etc. So racism, classism,
and sexism are not matters of ignorance or a lack of education. Foucault and
others in our time have shown that it is far harder than we think to have a selfidentity that doesn’t lead to exclusion. The real culture war is taking place inside
our own disordered hearts, wracked by inordinate desires for things that control
us, that lead us to feel superior and exclude those without them, and that fail to
satisfy us even when we get them.
The Cosmic Consequences of Sin

The Bible speaks even more comprehensively (and more mysteriously) about the
effects of sin than we have indicated so far. The first and second chapters of
Genesis show God speaking the world into being and, almost literally, getting his
hands dirty. “And God formed man from the dust of the ground and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life” (Genesis 2:7). The contrast with all other
ancient creation accounts could not be greater.
In most ancient creation accounts, creation is the by-product of some kind of
warfare or other act of violence. Virtually never is the creation deliberate and
planned. Secular scientific accounts of the origin of things are, interestingly,
almost identical to the older pagan ones. The physical shape of the world as well
as the biological life is the product of violent forces.
Unique among the creation accounts, the Bible depicts a world that is
brimming with dynamic, abundant forms of life that are perfectly interwoven,
interdependent, and mutually enhancing and enriching. The Creator’s response
to this is delight. He keeps repeating that it is all good. When he creates human
beings he instructs them to continue to cultivate and draw out the vast resources
of creation like a gardener does in a garden. “Go keep this going,” the Creator
seems to be saying in Genesis 1:28, “Have a ball!”15
The Hebrew word for this perfect, harmonious interdependence among all
parts of creation is called shalom. We translate it as “peace,” but the English
word is basically negative, referring to the absence of trouble or hostility. The
Hebrew word means much more than that. It means absolute wholeness—full,
harmonious, joyful, flourishing life.
The devastating loss of shalom through sin is described in Genesis 3. We are
told that as soon as we determined to serve ourselves instead of God—as soon as
we abandoned living for and enjoying God as our highest good—the entire
created world became broken. Human beings are so integral to the fabric of
things that when human beings turned from God the entire warp and woof of the
world unraveled. Disease, genetic disorders, famine, natural disasters, aging, and
death itself are as much the result of sin as are oppression, war, crime, and
violence. We have lost God’s shalom—physically, spiritually, socially,
psychologically, culturally. Things now fall apart. In Romans 8, Paul says that
the entire world is now “in bondage to decay” and “subject to futility” and will
not be put right until we are put right.

What Can Put It All Right?
At some point in most lives, we are confronted with the fact that we are not the
persons we know we should be. Almost always our response is to “turn over a
new leaf” and try harder to live according to our principles. That ultimately will
only lead us into a spiritual dead end.
In C. S. Lewis’s essay “Is Christianity Hard or Easy?” he depicts normal
human striving:
The ordinary idea which we all have is that…we have a natural self with various
desires and interests…and we know something called “morality” or “decent
behavior” has a claim on the self…. We are all hoping that when all the
demands of morality and society have been met, the poor natural self will still
have some chance, some time, to get on with its own life and do what it likes. In
fact, we are very like an honest man paying his taxes. He pays them, but he does
hope that there will be enough left over for him to live on.
The Christian way is different—both harder and easier. Christ says, “Give me
ALL. I don’t want just this much of your time and this much of your money and
this much of your work—so that your natural self can have the rest. I want you.
Not your things. I have come not to torture your natural self…I will give you a
new self instead. Hand over the whole natural self—ALL the desires, not just the
ones you think wicked but the ones you think innocent—the whole outfit. I will
give you a new self instead.”
Here Lewis works from Kierkegaard’s definition of sin. Sin is not simply
doing bad things, it is putting good things in the place of God. So the only
solution is not simply to change our behavior, but to reorient and center the
entire heart and life on God.
The almost impossibly hard thing is to hand over your whole self to Christ. But it
is far easier than what we are all trying to do instead. For what we are trying to
do is remain what we call “ourselves”—our personal happiness centered on
money or pleasure or ambition—and hoping, despite this, to behave honestly and
chastely and humbly. And that is exactly what Christ warned us you cannot do. If
I am a grass field—all the cutting will keep the grass less but won’t produce

wheat. If I want wheat…I must be plowed up and re-sown.
Does that scare you? Does it sound stifling? Remember this—if you don’t
live for Jesus you will live for something else. If you live for career and you
don’t do well it may punish you all of your life, and you will feel like a failure. If
you live for your children and they don’t turn out all right you could be
absolutely in torment because you feel worthless as a person.
If Jesus is your center and Lord and you fail him, he will forgive you. Your
career can’t die for your sins. You might say, “If I were a Christian I’d be going
around pursued by guilt all the time!” But we all are being pursued by guilt
because we must have an identity and there must be some standard to live up to
by which we get that identity. Whatever you base your life on—you have to live
up to that. Jesus is the one Lord you can live for who died for you—who
breathed his last breath for you. Does that sound oppressive?
You may say, “I see that Christianity might be just the thing for people who
have had collapses in their lives. But what if I don’t fail in my career and what if
I have a great family?” As Augustine said, if there is a God who created you,
then the deepest chambers of your soul simply cannot be filled up by anything
less. That is how great the human soul is. If Jesus is the Creator-Lord, then by
definition nothing could satisfy you like he can, even if you are successful. Even
the most successful careers and families cannot give the significance, security,
and affirmation that the author of glory and love can.
Everybody has to live for something. Whatever that something is becomes
“Lord of your life,” whether you think of it that way or not. Jesus is the only
Lord who, if you receive him, will fulfill you completely, and, if you fail him,
will forgive you eternally.

ELEVEN

RELIGION AND THE GOSPEL

At the very moment of that vain-glorious thought, a qualm came over me, a
horrid nausea and the most dreadful shuddering…I looked down…I was once
more Edward Hyde.
—Robert Louis Stevenson,
The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde

CHRISTIANITY teaches that our main problem is sin. What then is the
solution? Even if you accept the Christian diagnosis of the problem, there
doesn’t seem to be any particular reason why one must look only to Christianity
for the solution. You may say, “Fine, I understand that if you build your identity
on anything but God, it leads to breakdown. Why must the solution be Jesus and
Christianity? Why can’t some other religion do as well, or just my own personal
faith in God?”
The answer to that is that there is a profound and fundamental difference
between the way that other religions tell us to seek salvation and the way
described in the gospel of Jesus. All other major faiths have founders who are
teachers that show the way to salvation. Only Jesus claimed to actually be the
way of salvation himself. This difference is so great that, even though
Christianity can certainly be called a religion in the broader sense, for the
purposes of discussion we will use the term “religion” in this chapter to refer to
“salvation through moral effort” and “gospel” to refer to “salvation through
grace.”1
Two Forms of Self-Centeredness
In Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Dr.
Jekyll comes to realize that he is “an incongruous compound of good and evil.”

His bad nature is holding his good nature back, he believes. He can aspire to do
things, but he cannot follow through on them. Therefore he comes up with a
potion that can separate out his two natures. His hope is that his good self, which
will come out during the day, will be free from the influence of evil and will be
able to realize its goals. However, when he takes the potion one night and his
bad side comes out, he is far more evil than he expected. He describes his evil
self using classic Christian categories:
I knew myself, at the first breath of this new life, to be more wicked, tenfold more
wicked, sold a slave to my original evil; and the thought in that moment, braced
and delighted me like wine…. [Edward Hyde’s] every act and thought centered
on self.
Edward Hyde is so named not just because he is hideous but because he is
hidden. He thinks solely of his own desires; he doesn’t care in the slightest who
he hurts in order to gratify himself. He kills if someone gets in his way.
Stevenson is saying that even the best of people hide from themselves what is
within—an enormous capacity for egotism, self-absorption, and regard for your
own interests over those of all others. Self-aggrandizement is at the foundation
of so much of the misery of the world. It is the reason that the powerful and the
rich are indifferent to the plight of the poor. It is the reason for most of the
violence, crime, and warfare in the world. It is at the heart of most cases of
family disintegration. We hide from ourselves our self-centered capacity for acts
of evil, but situations arise that act as a “potion,” and out they come.
Once Jekyll realizes that he has this capacity for evil acts, he decides to
clamp down heavily on this terrible self-centeredness and pride at the core of his
being. In a sense, he “gets religion.” He solemnly resolves not to take the potion
anymore. He devotes himself to charity and good works, partially as atonement
for what Edward Hyde has done, and partially as an effort to simply smother his
selfish nature with acts of unselfishness.
However, one day Dr. Jekyll is sitting on a bench in Regents Park, thinking
about all the good he has been doing, and how much better a man he was,
despite Edward Hyde, than the great majority of people.
I resolved in my future conduct to redeem the past; and I can say with honesty
that my resolve was fruitful of some good. You know how earnestly, in the last

months of the last year, I labored to relieve suffering; you know that much was
done for others…. [But as] I smiled, comparing myself with other men,
comparing my active goodwill with the lazy cruelty of their neglect…at the very
moment of that vain-glorious thought, a qualm came over me, a horrid nausea
and the most dreadful shuddering…. I looked down…. I was once more Edward
Hyde.
This is a deadly turn of events. For the first time Jekyll becomes Hyde
involuntarily, without the potion, and this is the beginning of the end. Unable to
control his transformations any longer, Jekyll kills himself. Stevenson’s insight
here is, I think, profound. Why would Jekyll become Hyde without the potion?
Like so many people, Jekyll knows he is a sinner, so he tries desperately to cover
his sin with great piles of good works. Yet his efforts do not actually shrivel his
pride and self-centeredness, they only aggravate it. They lead him to superiority,
self-righteousness, pride and suddenly—look! Jekyll becomes Hyde, not in spite
of his goodness, but because of his goodness.
Sin and evil are self-centeredness and pride that lead to oppression against
others, but there are two forms of this. One form is being very bad and breaking
all the rules, and the other form is being very good and keeping all the rules and
becoming self-righteous. There are two ways to be your own Savior and Lord.
The first is by saying, “I am going to live my life the way I want.” The second is
described by Flannery O’Connor, who wrote about one of her characters, Hazel
Motes, that “he knew that the best way to avoid Jesus was to avoid sin.”2 If you
are avoiding sin and living morally so that God will have to bless and save you,
then ironically, you may be looking to Jesus as a teacher, model, and helper but
you are avoiding him as Savior. You are trusting in your own goodness rather
than in Jesus for your standing with God. You are trying to save yourself by
following Jesus.
That, ironically, is a rejection of the gospel of Jesus. It is a Christianized
form of religion. It is possible to avoid Jesus as Savior as much by keeping all
the Biblical rules as by breaking them. Both religion (in which you build your
identity on your moral achievements) and irreligion (in which you build your
identity on some other secular pursuit or relationship) are, ultimately, spiritually
identical courses to take. Both are “sin.” Self-salvation through good works may
produce a great deal of moral behavior in your life, but inside you are filled with
self-righteousness, cruelty, and bigotry, and you are miserable. You are always

comparing yourself to other people, and you are never sure you are being good
enough. You cannot, therefore, deal with your hideousness and self-absorption
through the moral law, by trying to be a good person through an act of the will.
You need a complete transformation of the very motives of your heart.
The devil, if anything, prefers Pharisees—men and women who try to save
themselves. They are more unhappy than either mature Christians or irreligious
people, and they do a lot more spiritual damage.
The Damage of Pharisaism
Why is Pharisaic religion so damaging? Recall the “sickness unto death,” the
spiritual deep nausea we experience when we fail to build our identity on God.
We struggle for a sense of worth, purpose, and distinctiveness, but it is based on
conditions that we can never achieve or maintain, and that are always slipping
away from us. As Kierkegaard says, we have not become ourselves. This is
experienced internally as anxiety, insecurity, and anger. It leads us externally to
marginalize, oppress, and exclude others.
Despite all their legal righteousness, then, Pharisees have lives that are, if
anything, more driven by the despair of sin. They build their sense of worth on
their moral and spiritual performance, as a kind of résumé to present before God
and the world. The moral and spiritual standards of all religions are very high,
and Pharisees know deep down that they are not fully living up to those
standards. They are not praying as often as they should. They are not loving and
serving their neighbor as much as they should. They are not keeping their inner
thoughts as pure as they should. The resulting internal anxiety, insecurity, and
irritability will often be much greater than anything experienced by the
irreligious.
Richard Lovelace captures well another way that Pharisaic religion is so
damaging:
Many…draw their assurance of acceptance with God from their sincerity, their
past experience of conversion, their recent religious performance or the relative
infrequency of their conscious, willful disobedience…. Their insecurity shows
itself in pride, a fierce, defensive assertion of their own righteousness, and
defensive criticism of others. They come naturally to hate other cultural styles

and other races in order to bolster their own security and discharge their
suppressed anger.3
As Lovelace says, Pharisaic religion doesn’t just damage the inner soul, it
also creates social strife. Pharisees need to shore up their sense of righteousness,
so they despise and attack all who don’t share their doctrinal beliefs and
religious practices. Racism and cultural imperialism result. Churches that are
filled with self-righteous, exclusive, insecure, angry, moralistic people are
extremely unattractive. Their public pronouncements are often highly
judgmental, while internally such churches experience many bitter conflicts,
splits, and divisions. When one of their leaders has a moral lapse, the churches
either rationalize it and denounce the leader’s critics, or else they scapegoat him.
Millions of people raised in or near these kinds of churches reject Christianity at
an early age or in college largely because of their experience. For the rest of their
lives, then, they are inoculated against Christianity. If you are a person who has
been disillusioned by such churches, anytime anyone recommends Christianity
to you, you assume they are calling you to adopt “religion.” Pharisees and their
unattractive lives leave many people confused about the real nature of
Christianity.
The Difference of Grace
There is, then, a great gulf between the understanding that God accepts us
because of our efforts and the understanding that God accepts us because of what
Jesus has done. Religion operates on the principle “I obey—therefore I am
accepted by God.” But the operating principle of the gospel is “I am accepted by
God through what Christ has done—therefore I obey.” Two people living their
lives on the basis of these two different principles may sit next to each other in
the church pew. They both pray, give money generously, and are loyal and
faithful to their family and church, trying to live decent lives. However, they do
so out of two radically different motivations, in two radically different spiritual
identities, and the result is two radically different kinds of lives.
The primary difference is that of motivation. In religion, we try to obey the
divine standards out of fear. We believe that if we don’t obey we are going to
lose God’s blessing in this world and the next. In the gospel, the motivation is
one of gratitude for the blessing we have already received because of Christ.
While the moralist is forced into obedience, motivated by fear of rejection, a

Christian rushes into obedience, motivated by a desire to please and resemble the
one who gave his life for us.
Another difference has to do with our identity and self-regard. In a religious
framework, if you feel you are living up to your chosen religious standards, then
you feel superior and disdainful toward those who are not following in the true
path. This is true whether your religion is of a more liberal variety (in which case
you will feel superior to bigots and narrow-minded people) or of a more
conservative variety (in which case you will feel superior to the less moral and
devout). If you are not living up to your chosen standards, then you will be filled
with a loathing toward yourself. You will feel far more guilt than if you had
stayed away from God and religion altogether.
When my own personal grasp of the gospel was very weak, my self-view
swung wildly between two poles. When I was performing up to my standards—
in academic work, professional achievement, or relationships—I felt confident
but not humble. I was likely to be proud and unsympathetic to failing people.
When I was not living up to standards, I felt humble but not confident, a failure.
I discovered, however, that the gospel contained the resources to build a unique
identity. In Christ I could know I was accepted by grace not only despite my
flaws, but because I was willing to admit them. The Christian gospel is that I am
so flawed that Jesus had to die for me, yet I am so loved and valued and that
Jesus was glad to die for me. This leads to deep humility and deep confidence at
the same time. It undermines both swaggering and sniveling. I cannot feel
superior to anyone, and yet I have nothing to prove to anyone. I do not think
more of myself nor less of myself. Instead, I think of myself less. I don’t need to
notice myself—how I’m doing, how I’m being regarded—so often.
Religion and the gospel also differ fundamentally in how they treat the Other
—those who do not share one’s own beliefs and practices. Postmodern thinkers
understand that the self is formed and strengthened through the exclusion of the
Other—those who do not have the values or traits on which I base my own
significance. We define ourselves by pointing to those whom we are not. We
bolster our sense of worth by devaluing those of other races, beliefs, and traits.4
This gospel identity gives us a new basis for harmonious and just social
arrangements. A Christian’s worth and value are not created by excluding
anyone, but through the Lord who was excluded for me. His grace both humbles
me more deeply than religion can (since I am too flawed to ever save myself
through my own effort), yet it also affirms me more powerfully than religion can

(since I can be absolutely certain of God’s unconditional acceptance).
That means that I cannot despise those who do not believe as I do. Since I
am not saved by my correct doctrine or practice, then this person before me,
even with his or her wrong beliefs, might be morally superior to me in many
ways. It also means I do not have to be intimidated by anyone. I am not so
insecure that I fear the power or success or talent of people who are different
from me. The gospel makes it possible for a person to escape oversensitivity,
defensiveness, and the need to criticize others. The Christian’s identity is not
based on the need to be perceived as a good person, but on God’s valuing of you
in Christ.
Religion and the gospel also lead to divergent ways of handling troubles and
suffering. Moralistic religion leads its participants to the conviction that if they
live an upstanding life, then God (and others) owe them respect and favor. They
believe they deserve a decent, happy life. If, however, life begins to go wrong,
moralists will experience debilitating anger. Either they will be furious with God
(or “the universe”) because they feel that since they live better than others, they
should have a better life. Or else they will be deeply angry at themselves, unable
to shake the feeling that they have not lived as they should or kept up to
standards. The gospel, however, makes it possible for someone to escape the
spiral of bitterness, self-recrimination, and despair when life goes wrong. They
know that the basic premise of religion—that if you live a good life, things will
go well for you—is wrong. Jesus was the most morally upright person who ever
lived, yet he had a life filled with the experience of poverty, rejection, injustice,
and even torture.
The Threat of Grace
When many first hear the distinction between religion and the gospel, they think
that it just sounds too easy. “Nice deal!” they may say. “If that is Christianity, all
I have to do is get a personal relationship to God and then do anything I want!”
Those words, however, can only be spoken on the outside of an experience of
radical grace. No one from the inside speaks like that. In fact, grace can be quite
threatening.
Some years ago I met with a woman who began coming to church at
Redeemer. She said that she had gone to church growing up and had never

before heard a distinction drawn between the gospel and religion. She had
always heard that God accepts us only if we are good enough. She said that the
new message was scary. I asked her why it was scary, and she replied:
If I was saved by my good works then there would be a limit to what God could
ask of me or put me through. I would be like a taxpayer with “rights”—I would
have done my duty and now I would deserve a certain quality of life. But if I am
a sinner saved by sheer grace—then there’s nothing he cannot ask of me.
She understood the dynamic of grace and gratitude. If when you have lost all
fear of punishment you also lose all incentive to live a good, unselfish life, then
the only incentive you ever had to live a decent life was fear. This woman could
see immediately that the wonderful-beyond-belief teaching of salvation by sheer
grace had an edge to it. She knew that if she was a sinner saved by grace, she
was (if anything) more subject to the sovereign Lordship of God. She knew that
if Jesus really had done all this for her, she would not be her own. She would
joyfully, gratefully belong to Jesus, who provided all this for her at infinite cost
to himself.
From the outside that might sound coercive, like a grinding obligation. From
the inside the motivation is all joy. Think of what happens when you fall in love.
Your love makes you eager for acceptance from the beloved. You ask, “Do you
want to go out?” or maybe even, “Will you marry me?” What happens when the
answer is “Yes”? Do you say, “Great! I’m in! Now I can act any way I want”? Of
course not. Now you don’t even wait for the object of your affection to directly
ask you to do something for them. You anticipate whatever pleases and delights
them. There’s no coercion or sense of obligation, yet your behavior has been
radically changed by the mind and heart of the person you love.
No one put this more vividly than Victor Hugo in Les Misérables. His main
character, Jean Valjean, is a bitter ex-convict. He steals silver from a bishop who
has already shown him kindness. He is caught by gendarmes, and is brought
back under arrest to the bishop’s home. In an act of radical grace the bishop
gives Valjean the silver and releases him from arrest. This act of mercy shakes
him to the core. In the following chapter Hugo spells out how threatening this
grace was:
To this celestial kindness [of the bishop] he opposed pride, which is the fortress

of evil within us. He was indistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was
the greatest assault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet;
that his obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency; that if he
yielded, he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which the actions of
other men had filled his soul through so many years, and which pleased him;
that this time it was necessary to conquer or to be conquered; and that a
struggle, a colossal and final struggle, had been begun between his viciousness
and the goodness of that man.5
Valjean chooses to let grace have its way with him. He gives up his deep selfpity and bitterness and begins to live a life of graciousness toward others. He is
changed at the root of his being.
The other main character in the novel is the police officer Javert, who has
built his entire life on his understanding of rewards and punishments. He
relentlessly and self-righteously pursues Valjean throughout the book, even
though it is wrecking his own life. Finally, Javert falls into Valjean’s hands.
Instead of killing him, Valjean lets his enemy go. This act of radical grace is
deeply troublesome to Javert. He realizes that to appropriately respond to this
gesture will require a complete change in his worldview. Rather than make that
change, he throws himself into the Seine.
This may seem the greatest paradox of all. The most liberating act of free,
unconditional grace demands that the recipient give up control of his or her life.
Is that a contradiction? No, not if you remember the point of Chapters 3 and 9.
We are not in control of our lives. We are all living for something and we are
controlled by that, the true lord of our lives. If it is not God, it will endlessly
oppress us. It is only grace that frees us from the slavery of self that lurks even
in the middle of morality and religion. Grace is only a threat to the illusion that
we are free, autonomous selves, living life as we choose.
The gospel makes it possible to have such a radically different life.
Christians, however, often fail to make use of the resources of the gospel to live
the lives they are capable of in Christ. It is critical for anyone reading this book
to recognize this fundamental difference between the gospel and religion.
Christianity’s basic message differs at root with the assumptions of traditional
religion. The founders of every other major religion essentially came as teachers,
not as saviors. They came to say: “Do this and you will find the divine.” But

Jesus came essentially as a savior rather than a teacher (though he was that as
well). Jesus says: “I am the divine come to you, to do what you could not do for
yourselves.” The Christian message is that we are saved not by our record, but
by Christ’s record. So Christianity is not religion or irreligion. It is something
else altogether.

TWELVE

THE (TRUE) STORY OF THE CROSS

I could accept Jesus as a martyr, and embodiment of sacrifice, and a divine
teacher. His death on the cross was a great example to the world, but that there
was anything like a mysterious or miraculous virtue in it, my heart could not
accept.
—Gandhi, An Autobiography
I would catch a glimpse of the cross—and suddenly my heart would stand still.
In an instinctive, intuitive way I understood that something more important,
more tumultuous, more passionate, was at issue than our good causes, however
noble they might be…. I should have worn it…. It should have been my uniform,
my language, my life. I shall have no excuse; I can’t say I didn’t know. I knew
from the beginning, and turned away.
—Malcolm Muggeridge, Jesus Rediscovered

THE primary symbol of Christianity has always been the cross. The death of
Jesus for our sins is at the heart of the gospel, the good news. Increasingly,
however, what the Christian church has considered good news is considered by
the rest of our culture to be bad news.
In the Christian account, Jesus dies so that God can forgive sins. For many,
that seems ludicrous or even sinister. “Why would Jesus have to die?” is a
question that I have heard from people in New York far more often than “Does
God exist?” “Why couldn’t God just forgive us?” they ask. “The Christian God
sounds like the vengeful gods of primitive times who needed to be appeased by
human sacrifice.” Why can’t God just accept everyone or at least those who are
sorry for their wrongdoings? While the Christian doctrine of the cross confuses
some people, it alarms others. Some liberal Protestant theologians reject the
doctrine of the cross altogether because it looks to them like “divine child

abuse.”
Why, then, don’t we just leave the Cross out? Why not focus on the life of
Jesus and his teachings rather than on his death? Why did Jesus have to die?
The First Reason: Real Forgiveness Is Costly Suffering
Let’s begin with a purely economic example. Imagine that someone borrows
your car, and as he backs it out of the driveway he strikes a gate, knocking it
down along with part of a wall. Your property insurance doesn’t cover the gate
and garden wall. What can you do? There are essentially two options. The first is
to demand that he pay for the damages. The second is to refuse to let him pay
anything. There may also be middle-of-the-road solutions in which you both
share the payment. Notice that in every option the cost of the damage must be
borne by someone. Either you or he absorbs the cost for the deed, but the debt
does not somehow vanish into thin air. Forgiveness, in this illustration, means
bearing the cost for his misdeed yourself.
Most of the wrongs done to us cannot be assessed in purely economic terms.
Someone may have robbed you of some happiness, reputation, opportunity, or
certain aspects of your freedom. No price tag can be put on such things, yet we
still have a sense of violated justice that does not go away when the other person
says, “I’m really sorry.” When we are seriously wronged we have an indelible
sense that the perpetrators have incurred a debt that must be dealt with. Once
you have been wronged and you realize there is a just debt that can’t simply be
dismissed—there are only two things to do.
The first option is to seek ways to make the perpetrators suffer for what they
have done. You can withhold relationship and actively initiate or passively wish
for some kind of pain in their lives commensurate to what you experienced.
There are many ways to do this. You can viciously confront them, saying things
that hurt. You can go around to others to tarnish their reputation. If the
perpetrators suffer, you may begin to feel a certain satisfaction, feeling that they
are now paying off their debt.
There are some serious problems with this option, however. You may
become harder and colder, more self-pitying, and therefore more self-absorbed.
If the wrongdoer was a person of wealth or authority you may instinctively
dislike and resist that sort of person for the rest of your life. If it was a person of

the opposite sex or another race you might become permanently cynical and
prejudiced against whole classes of people. In addition, the perpetrator and his
friends and family often feel they have the right to respond to your payback in
kind. Cycles of reaction and retaliation can go on for years. Evil has been done
to you—yes. But when you try to get payment through revenge the evil does not
disappear. Instead it spreads, and it spreads most tragically of all into you and
your own character.
There is another option, however. You can forgive. Forgiveness means
refusing to make them pay for what they did. However, to refrain from lashing
out at someone when you want to do so with all your being is agony. It is a form
of suffering. You not only suffer the original loss of happiness, reputation, and
opportunity, but now you forgo the consolation of inflicting the same on them.
You are absorbing the debt, taking the cost of it completely on yourself instead
of taking it out of the other person. It hurts terribly. Many people would say it
feels like a kind of death.
Yes, but it is a death that leads to resurrection instead of the lifelong living
death of bitterness and cynicism. As a pastor I have counseled many people
about forgiveness, and I have found that if they do this—if they simply refuse to
take vengeance on the wrongdoer in action and even in their inner fantasies—the
anger slowly begins to subside. You are not giving it any fuel and so the
resentment burns lower and lower. C. S. Lewis wrote in one of his Letters to
Malcolm that “last week, while at prayer, I suddenly discovered—or felt as if I
did—that I had really forgiven someone I had been trying to forgive for over
thirty years. Trying, and praying that I might.”1 I remember once counseling a
sixteen-year-old girl about the anger she felt toward her father. We weren’t
getting anywhere until I said to her, “Your father has defeated you, as long as
you hate him. You will stay trapped in your anger unless you forgive him
thoroughly from the heart and begin to love him.” Something thawed in her
when she realized that. She went through the suffering of costly forgiveness,
which at first always feels far worse than bitterness, into eventual freedom.
Forgiveness must be granted before it can be felt, but it does come eventually. It
leads to a new peace, a resurrection. It is the only way to stop the spread of the
evil.
When I counsel forgiveness to people who have been harmed, they often ask
about the wrongdoers, “Shouldn’t they be held accountable?” I usually respond,
“Yes, but only if you forgive them.” There are many good reasons that we should

want to confront wrongdoers. Wrongdoers have inflicted damage and, as in the
example of the gate I presented earlier, it costs something to fix the damage. We
should confront wrongdoers—to wake them up to their real character, to move
them to repair their relationships, or to at least constrain them and protect others
from being harmed by them in the future. Notice, however, that all those reasons
for confrontation are reasons of love. The best way to love them and the other
potential victims around them is to confront them in the hope that they will
repent, change, and make things right.
The desire for vengeance, however, is motivated not by goodwill but by ill
will. You may say, “I just want to hold them accountable,” but your real
motivation may be simply to see them hurt. If you are not confronting them for
their sake or for society’s sake but for your own sake, just for payback, the
chance of the wrongdoer ever coming to repentance is virtually nil. In such a
case you, the confronter, will overreach, seeking not justice but revenge, not
their change but their pain. Your demands will be excessive and your attitude
abusive. He or she will rightly see the confrontation as intended simply to cause
hurt. A cycle of retaliation will begin.
Only if you first seek inner forgiveness will your confrontation be temperate,
wise, and gracious. Only when you have lost the need to see the other person
hurt will you have any chance of actually bringing about change, reconciliation,
and healing. You have to submit to the costly suffering and death of forgiveness
if there is going to be any resurrection.
No one embodied the costliness of forgiveness any better than Dietrich
Bonhoeffer, whose story I recounted in Chapter 4.2 After Bonhoeffer returned to
Germany to resist Hitler, he wrote in The Cost of Discipleship (1937) that true
forgiveness is always a form of suffering.
My brother’s burden which I must bear is not only his outward lot, his natural
characteristics and gifts, but quite literally his sin. And the only way to bear that
sin is by forgiving it in the power of the cross of Christ in which I now share….
Forgiveness is the Christlike suffering which it is the Christian’s duty to bear.3
In April 1943 Bonhoeffer was arrested and imprisoned. He was eventually
moved to Flossenburg concentration camp and executed just before the end of
World War II.

How did Bonhoeffer live out his own words? His forgiveness was costly
suffering, because it actually confronted the hurt and evil before him. His
forgiveness was not what he called (in The Cost of Discipleship) “cheap grace.”
He did not ignore or excuse sin. He resisted it head on, even though it cost him
everything. His forgiveness was also costly because he refused to hate. He
passed through the agonizing process required to love your enemies, so his
resistance to their evildoing was measured and courageous, not venomous and
cruel. The startling evidence for this is found in the letters and papers that
Bonhoeffer wrote while in prison. The lack of bitterness was remarkable.
Please don’t ever get anxious or worried about me, but don’t forget to pray for
me—I’m sure you don’t. I am so sure of God’s guiding hand that I hope I shall
always be kept in that certainty. You must never doubt that I’m traveling with
gratitude and cheerfulness along the road where I’m being led. My past life is
brim-full of God’s goodness and my sins are covered by the forgiving love of
Christ crucified….4
Here we see Bonhoeffer simply living out what Jesus had done for him.
Jesus bore his sins, bearing the cost of them. Now Bonhoeffer is free to do the
same for others. Bonhoeffer uses divine forgiveness to help him understand
human forgiveness. But let’s now use Bonhoeffer’s marvelous example of
human forgiveness to understand the divine.
The Forgiveness of God
“Why did Jesus have to die? Couldn’t God just forgive us?” This is what many
ask, but now we can see that no one “just” forgives, if the evil is serious.
Forgiveness means bearing the cost instead of making the wrongdoer do it, so
you can reach out in love to seek your enemy’s renewal and change. Forgiveness
means absorbing the debt of the sin yourself. Everyone who forgives great evil
goes through a death into resurrection, and experiences nails, blood, sweat, and
tears.
Should it surprise us, then, that when God determined to forgive us rather
than punish us for all the ways we have wronged him and one another, that he
went to the Cross in the person of Jesus Christ and died there? As Bonhoeffer
says, everyone who forgives someone bears the other’s sins. On the Cross we see

God doing visibly and cosmically what every human being must do to forgive
someone, though on an infinitely greater scale. I would argue, of course, that
human forgiveness works this way because we unavoidably reflect the image of
our Creator. That is why we should not be surprised that if we sense that the only
way to triumph over evil is to go through the suffering of forgiveness, that this
would be far more true of God, whose just passion to defeat evil and loving
desire to forgive others are both infinitely greater than ours.
It is crucial at this point to remember that the Christian faith has always
understood that Jesus Christ is God.5 God did not, then, inflict pain on someone
else, but rather on the Cross absorbed the pain, violence, and evil of the world
into himself. Therefore the God of the Bible is not like the primitive deities who
demanded our blood for their wrath to be appeased. Rather, this is a God who
becomes human and offers his own lifeblood in order to honor moral justice and
merciful love so that someday he can destroy all evil without destroying us.
Therefore the Cross is not simply a lovely example of sacrificial love.
Throwing your life away needlessly is not admirable—it is wrong.6 Jesus’s death
was only a good example if it was more than an example, if it was something
absolutely necessary to rescue us. And it was. Why did Jesus have to die in order
to forgive us? There was a debt to be paid—God himself paid it. There was a
penalty to be born—God himself bore it. Forgiveness is always a form of costly
suffering.
We have seen how human forgiveness and its costliness sheds light on divine
forgiveness. However, it is divine forgiveness that is the ultimate ground and
resource for the human. Bonhoeffer repeatedly attested to this, claiming that it
was Jesus’s forgiveness of him on the Cross that gave him such a security in
God’s love that he could live a life of sacrificial service to others.
The Second Reason: Real Love Is a Personal Exchange
In the mid-nineties, a Protestant denomination held a theological conference in
which one speaker said, “I don’t think we need a theory of atonement at all; I
don’t think we need folks hanging on crosses and blood dripping and weird
stuff.”7 Why can’t we just concentrate on teaching about how God is a God of
love? The answer is that if you take away the Cross you don’t have a God of
love.

In the real world of relationships it is impossible to love people with a
problem or a need without in some sense sharing or even changing places with
them. All real life-changing love involves some form of this kind of exchange.
It requires very little of you to love a person who is pulled together and
happy. Think, however, of emotionally wounded people. There is no way to
listen and love people like that and stay completely emotionally intact yourself.
It may be that they may feel stronger and more affirmed as you talk, but that
won’t happen without you being quite emotionally drained yourself. It’s them or
you. To bring them up emotionally you must be willing to be drained
emotionally.
Take another example. Imagine you come into contact with a man who is
innocent, but who is being hunted down by secret agents or by the government
or by some other powerful group. He reaches out to you for help. If you don’t
help him, he will probably die, but if you ally with him, you—who were
perfectly safe and secure—will be in mortal danger. This is the stuff that movie
plots are made of. Again, it’s him or you. He will experience increased safety
and security through your involvement, but only because you are willing to enter
into his insecurity and vulnerability.
Consider parenting. Children come into the world in a condition of complete
dependence. They cannot operate as self-sufficient, independent agents unless
their parents give up much of their own independence and freedom for years. If
you don’t allow your children to hinder your freedom in work and play at all,
and if you only get to your children when it doesn’t inconvenience you, your
children will grow up physically only. In all sorts of other ways they will remain
emotionally needy, troubled, and overdependent. The choice is clear. You can
either sacrifice your freedom or theirs. It’s them or you. To love your children
well, you must decrease that they may increase. You must be willing to enter into
the dependency they have so eventually they can experience the freedom and
independence you have.
All life-changing love toward people with serious needs is a substitutional
sacrifice. If you become personally involved with them, in some way, their
weaknesses flow toward you as your strengths flow toward them. In The Cross
of Christ, John Stott writes that substitution is at the heart of the Christian
message:

The essence of sin is we human beings substituting ourselves for God, while the
essence of salvation is God substituting himself for us. We…put ourselves where
only God deserves to be; God…puts himself where we deserve to be.8
If that is true, how can God be a God of love if he does not become
personally involved in suffering the same violence, oppression, grief, weakness,
and pain that we experience? The answer to that question is twofold. First, God
can’t. Second, only one major world religion even claims that God does.
The Great Reversal
JoAnne Terrell wrote about how her mother was murdered by her mother’s
boyfriend. “I had to find a connection between my mom’s story and my story
and Jesus’s story,” she said. She found it in understanding the Cross—namely,
that Jesus did not only suffer for us but with us. He knew what it was like
(literally) to be under the lash, and to refuse to be cowed by those in power, and
to pay for it with his life. He voluntarily took his place beside those who were
without power and suffering from injustice.9 As John Stott wrote, “I could never
myself believe in God if it were not for the Cross. In the real world of pain, how
could one worship a God who was immune to it?”
Therefore the Cross, when properly understood, cannot possibly be used to
encourage the oppressed to simply accept violence. When Jesus suffered for us,
he was honoring justice. But when Jesus suffered with us he was identifying
with the oppressed of the world, not with their oppressors. All life-changing love
entails an exchange, a reversal of places, but here is the Great Reversal. God, in
the place of ultimate power, reverses places with the marginalized, the poor, and
the oppressed. The prophets always sang songs about God as one who has
“brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the poor” (Luke 1:52),
but never could they have imagined that God himself would come down off his
ultimate throne and suffer with the oppressed so that they might be lifted up.
This pattern of the Cross means that the world’s glorification of power,
might, and status is exposed and defeated. On the Cross Christ wins through
losing, triumphs through defeat, achieves power through weakness and service,
comes to wealth via giving all away. Jesus Christ turns the values of the world
upside down. As N. T. Wright says:

The real enemy, after all, was not Rome but the powers of evil that stood behind
human arrogance and violence…. [On the cross] the kingdom of God triumphed
over the kingdoms of this world by refusing to join in their spiral of violence.
[On the cross, Jesus] would love his enemies, turn the other cheek, go the second
mile.10
This upside-down pattern so contradicts the thinking and practice of the
world that it creates an “alternate kingdom,” an alternate reality, a counterculture
among those who have been transformed by it. In this peaceable kingdom there
is a reversal of the values of the world with regard to power, recognition, status,
and wealth. In this new counterculture, Christians look at money as something to
give away. They look at power as something to use strictly for service. Racial
and class superiority, accrual of money and power at the expense of others,
yearning for popularity and recognition, these normal marks of human life, are
the opposite of the mindset of those who have understood and experienced the
Cross. Christ creates a whole new order of life. Those who are shaped by the
great reversal of the Cross no longer need self-justification through money,
status, career, or pride of race and class. So the Cross creates a counterculture in
which sex, money, and power cease to control us and are used in life-giving and
community-building rather than destructive ways.
To understand why Jesus had to die it is important to remember both the
result of the Cross (costly forgiveness of sins) and the pattern of the Cross
(reversal of the world’s values). On the cross neither justice nor mercy loses out
—both are fulfilled at once. Jesus’s death was necessary if God was going to
take justice seriously and still love us. This same concern for both love and
justice should mark all our relationships. We should never acquiesce in injustice.
Jesus identified with the oppressed. Yet we should not try to overcome evil with
evil. Jesus forgave his enemies and died for them.
Why then, did Jesus have to die? Even Jesus asked that question. In the
Garden of Gethsemane he asked if there was any other way. There wasn’t. There
isn’t. On the cross, in agony, he cried out the question, “Why!?” Why was he
being forsaken?11 Why was it all necessary? The answer of the Bible is—for us.
The Story of the Cross
I have tried to explain what Jesus has done for us when he died. I’ve done so by

distilling some principles. I can’t do the doctrine of the Cross full justice,
however. I’ve heard that the great author Flannery O’Connor was once asked to
put the meaning of one of her short stories “in a nutshell.” She responded tartly
that, if she could have put the meaning into a nutshell, she wouldn’t have had to
write the story. I’ve been trying to put the Cross of Jesus in a nutshell because I
think it is an important exercise. Nevertheless, an exposition like this chapter of
mine can’t convey all the life-changing power of the narrative arc itself.
The stories that always seem to move us most deeply are those in which
someone faces irremediable loss or death in order to bring life to someone else.
There is almost no popular movie, for example, that doesn’t make this its main
theme. One of my personal favorites is Angels with Dirty Faces. James Cagney
plays Rocky Sullivan, a celebrity criminal who is the idol of all the young
juvenile delinquents in the city. He is about to go to the electric chair. The night
before his execution he is visited by his boyhood friend Jerry, played by Pat
O’Brien, who is now a priest trying to save inner-city kids from a life of crime.
Jerry makes a shocking request, but he says it is the only way that the kids he is
working with can be turned away from the destructive path they’ve chosen.
I want you to let them down. You see, you’ve been a hero to these kids, and
hundreds of others, all through your life—and now you’re gonna be a glorified
hero in death, and I want to prevent that, Rocky. They’ve got to despise your
memory. They’ve got to be ashamed of you.
Rocky is incredulous.
You asking me to pull an act, turn yellow, so those kids will think I’m no good….
You ask me to throw away the only thing I’ve got left…. You ask me to crawl on
my belly—the last thing I do in life…. Nothing doing. You’re asking too much….
You want to help those kids, you got to think about some other way.
Jerry is calling Rocky to do the Great Reversal, the substitutionary sacrifice.
If you hold on to your dignity, he says, they’ll die in shame. If you die in shame,
relinquish your glory, the boys’ lives can be saved. It’s the only way to release
his boys from their hero worship. Rocky refuses. But the next morning he walks
to the execution chamber. Suddenly he begins to cry out for mercy in cowardly
hysterics, and dies in humiliation, making the ultimate sacrifice. Movie viewers

are always stunned. I should know because every time I watch it I am shaken
and it makes me want to live my life differently. Such is the life-affecting power
of story.
Another great example of this kind of narrative is A Tale of Two Cities.
Charles Darnay and Sydney Carton look very much alike, and they both love the
same woman, Lucie Manette. Lucie chooses and marries Charles and they have a
child. The setting of the story is the French Revolution, and Charles, who is a
French aristocrat, is arrested, imprisoned, and sentenced to die by guillotine.
At the end of the novel, Sydney, who is English, visits Charles the night
before he is to be executed. He offers to exchange places with him. Charles
refuses, but Sydney has him drugged and smuggles him away into a waiting
carriage. Then Sydney takes Charles’s place. Charles and his family escape
afterward to England.
That night in the prison, a young seamstress who is also condemned to die
comes up to Sydney and begins to converse with him, thinking him to be Charles
Darnay. When she realizes that it is not him, her eyes widen and she asks: “Are
you dying for him?” Sydney responds: “And his wife and child. Hush! Yes.” The
seamstress then confesses that she is terribly frightened and is not sure she will
be able to face her death. She asks the brave stranger if he will hold her hand to
the end. When the time comes, they go to death hand in hand. She finds herself
composed, even comforted and hopeful, as long as she keeps her eyes on him.
The girl in the story was sinking under the weight of her trial. Her strength
was giving out, but then she was smitten by the wonder of his substitutionary
sacrifice, and it enabled her to face the ultimate test.
Moving? Yes, but the gospel goes one better.12 I always found these stories
of sacrifice very emotionally affecting. I came away from them resolving to live
more courageously and unselfishly. I never did follow through on my
resolutions, however. The stories moved my emotions and pricked my
conscience, but my heart’s basic patterns stayed intact. I was still driven by a
need to prove myself to others, to win approval and acclaim, to control what
people thought of me. As long as these fears and needs had such power over me,
my intentions to change could not go very far.
The gospel, however, is not just a moving fictional story about someone else.

It is a true story about us. We are actually in it. We are those delinquent boys,
and to save us Jesus gave up something infinitely greater than human celebrity.
Also, Jesus has come to us in our prison and despite our unwillingness to be
saved has taken our place. The seamstress was moved by a sacrifice that wasn’t
even for her. How much more can we be empowered by the discovery that Jesus
has given himself for us, has changed places with us?
I can only say that observing these stories from the outside stirred me, but
when I realized I was actually inside Jesus’s story (and he inside mine) it
changed me. The fear and pride that captured my heart was finally dislodged.
The fact that Jesus had to die for me humbled me out of my pride. The fact that
Jesus was glad to die for me assured me out of my fear.

THIRTEEN

THE REALITY OF THE RESURRECTION

My question—that which at the age of fifty brought me to the verge of suicide—
was the simplest of questions, lying in the soul of every man…a question without
an answer to which one cannot live. It was: “What will come of what I am doing
today or tomorrow? What will come of my whole life? Why should I live, why
wish for anything, or do anything?” It can also be expressed thus: Is there any
meaning in my life that the inevitable death awaiting me does not destroy?
—Leo Tolstoy, A Confession

WHEN I was studying philosophy and religion in college, I was taught that
the resurrection of Jesus was a major historical problem, no matter how you
looked at it. Most modern historians made the philosophical assumption that
miracles simply cannot happen, and that made the claim of the resurrection
highly problematic. However, if you disbelieved the resurrection you then had
the difficulty of explaining how the Christian church got started at all.
Several years ago I was diagnosed with thyroid cancer. It was treatable and
was removed successfully with surgery and other therapy. However, to
paraphrase Samuel Johnson, the “cancer” word pronounced over you under any
circumstances concentrates the mind wonderfully. During my treatment I
discovered N. T. Wright’s The Resurrection of the Son of God, the latest
historical scholarship on Jesus’s resurrection. I read it with great attention. It
became quite clear to me how much more than a historical, philosophical issue
this was. It is that, but it is much more. If it happened, it changes our lives
completely.
Sometimes people approach me and say, “I really struggle with this aspect of
Christian teaching. I like this part of Christian belief, but I don’t think I can
accept that part.” I usually respond: “If Jesus rose from the dead, then you have
to accept all he said; if he didn’t rise from the dead, then why worry about any of

what he said? The issue on which everything hangs is not whether or not you
like his teaching but whether or not he rose from the dead.” That is how the first
hearers felt who heard reports of the resurrection. They knew that if it was true it
meant we can’t live our lives any way we want. It also meant we don’t have to
be afraid of anything, not Roman swords, not cancer, nothing. If Jesus rose from
the dead, it changes everything.
Did he? Let’s look at the reasons and evidence, the arguments and
counterarguments.
Most people think that, when it comes to Jesus’s resurrection, the burden of
proof is on believers to give evidence that it happened. That is not completely
the case. The resurrection also puts a burden of proof on its nonbelievers. It is
not enough to simply believe Jesus did not rise from the dead. You must then
come up with a historically feasible alternate explanation for the birth of the
church. You have to provide some other plausible account for how things began.
Most people who don’t believe the resurrection of Jesus really happened offer
something like the following scenario for Christian beginnings.
People at that time, it is said, did not have our scientific knowledge about the
world. They were credulous about magical and supernatural happenings. They
could easily have fallen prey to reports of a risen Jesus, because they believed
that resurrections from the dead were possible. Jesus’s followers were
heartbroken when he was killed. Since they believed he was the Messiah, they
may have begun to sense that he was still with them, guiding them, living on in
their hearts in spirit. Some may have even felt they had visions of him speaking
to them. Over the decades these feelings of Jesus living on spiritually developed
into stories that he had been raised physically. The resurrection accounts in the
four gospels were devised to bolster this belief.
The alternate account proposed in the preceding paragraph sounds plausible
to the average contemporary person, but only because we are ignorant of the
historical and cultural context.
The Empty Tomb and the Witnesses
The first fallacy in the alternate account is the claim that the resurrection
narratives in the gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John must have been
developed later, long after the events themselves. It is argued that the two main

features of these texts—the empty tomb and the eyewitnesses—were
fabrications. That can’t be true.
The first accounts of the empty tomb and the eyewitnesses are not found in
the gospels, but in the letters of Paul, which every historian agrees were written
just fifteen to twenty years after the death of Jesus. One of the most interesting
texts is 1 Corinthians 15:3-6:
For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for
our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the
third day according to the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Peter, and then to
the Twelve. After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers at
the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have died.
Here Paul not only speaks of the empty tomb and resurrection on the “third
day” (showing he is talking of a historical event, not a symbol or metaphor) but
he also lists the eyewitnesses. Paul indicates that the risen Jesus not only
appeared to individuals and small groups, but he also appeared to five hundred
people at once, most of whom were still alive at the time of his writing and could
be consulted for corroboration. Paul’s letter was to a church, and therefore it was
a public document, written to be read aloud. Paul was inviting anyone who
doubted that Jesus had appeared to people after his death to go and talk to the
eyewitnesses if they wished. It was a bold challenge and one that could easily be
taken up, since during the pax Romana travel around the Mediterranean was safe
and easy. Paul could not have made such a challenge if those eyewitnesses didn’t
exist.
Another important feature of this text is that Paul insists that he was
faithfully recounting the testimony that had been handed to him. Critical scholars
from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries assumed the early Christians
would have used a process for transmitting popular folktales that altered tales in
the telling, like a cultural version of the children’s game “Whisper Down the
Valley.” As I noted in Chapter 6, however, more recent anthropological studies
show that ancient cultures clearly distinguish between fictional stories and
historical accounts in transmission. Historical accounts were not allowed to be
changed.1 That is what Paul is claiming, that the reports of the resurrection he
conveys were taken intact from the mouths of the people who actually saw Jesus.

Additionally, the accounts of the resurrection in the Bible were too
problematic to be fabrications. Each gospel states that the first eyewitnesses to
the resurrection were women. Women’s low social status meant that their
testimony was not admissible evidence in court. There was no possible
advantage to the church to recount that all the first witnesses were women. It
could only have undermined the credibility of the testimony. The only possible
explanation for why women were depicted as meeting Jesus first is if they really
had. N. T. Wright argues that there must have been enormous pressure on the
early proclaimers of the Christian message to remove the women from the
accounts. They felt they could not do so—the records were too well known.2 The
accounts of the first eyewitnesses of the resurrection would have been
electrifying and life-changing, passed along and retold more than any other
stories about the life of Jesus.
Also, as Wright argues, the empty tomb and the accounts of personal
meetings with Jesus are even more historically certain when you realize they
must be taken together. If there had been only an empty tomb and no sightings,
no one would have concluded it was a resurrection. They would have assumed
that the body had been stolen. Yet if there had been only eyewitness sightings of
Jesus and no empty tomb, no one would have concluded it was a resurrection,
because people’s accounts of seeing departed loved ones happen all the time.
Only if the two factors were both true together would anyone have concluded
that Jesus was raised from the dead.3
Paul’s letters show that Christians proclaimed Jesus’s bodily resurrection
from the very beginning. That meant the tomb must have been empty. No one in
Jerusalem would have believed the preaching for a minute if the tomb was not
empty. Skeptics could have easily produced Jesus’s rotted corpse. Also, Paul
could not be telling people in a public document that there were scores of
eyewitnesses alive if there were not. We can’t permit ourselves the luxury of
thinking that the resurrection accounts were only fabricated years later.
Whatever else happened, the tomb of Jesus must have really been empty and
hundreds of witnesses must have claimed that they saw him bodily raised.
Resurrection and Immortality
There is, therefore, very strong evidence that the tomb was empty and there were
hundreds of people who claimed they saw the risen Christ. That much is

“historically secure,” as Wright puts it. “But surely,” someone can respond, “that
doesn’t prove Jesus was really resurrected. Surely the followers desperately
wanted to believe that Jesus was raised from the dead. If anyone had stolen the
body in order to make it look like he had been raised, many sincere people could
have thought they’d seen him, and maybe a few others went along with saying
so for a good cause.”
The assumption behind this very common hypothesis is a form of what C. S.
Lewis has called “chronological snobbery.” We imagine that we modern people
take claims of a bodily resurrection with skepticism, while the ancients, full of
credulity about the supernatural, would have immediately accepted it. That is not
the case. To all the dominant worldviews of the time, an individual bodily
resurrection was almost inconceivable.
N. T. Wright does an extensive survey of the non-Jewish thought of the firstcentury Mediterranean world, both east and west, and reveals that the universal
view of the people of that time was that a bodily resurrection was impossible.
Why? In Greco-Roman thinking, the soul or spirit was good and the physical and
material world was weak, corrupt, and defiling. To them the physical, by
definition, was always falling apart and therefore salvation was conceived as
liberation from the body. In this worldview resurrection was not only
impossible, but totally undesirable. No soul, having gotten free from its body,
would ever want it back. Even those who believed in reincarnation understood
that the return to embodied life meant that the soul was not yet out of its prison.
The goal was to get free of the body forever. Once your soul is free of its body, a
return to re-embodied life was outlandish, unthinkable, and impossible.4
The report of Jesus’s resurrection would have also have been unthinkable to
the Jews. Unlike the Greeks, the Jews saw the material and physical world as
good. Death was not seen as liberation from the material world but as a tragedy.
By Jesus’s day many Jews had come to hope that some day in the future there
would be a bodily resurrection of all the righteous, when God renewed the entire
world and removed all suffering and death.5 The resurrection, however, was
merely one part of the complete renewal of the whole world, according to Jewish
teaching. The idea of an individual being resurrected, in the middle of history,
while the rest of the world continued on burdened by sickness, decay, and death,
was inconceivable. If someone had said to any first-century Jew, “So-and-so has
been resurrected from the dead!” the response would be, “Are you crazy? How
could that be? Has disease and death ended? Is true justice established in the

world? Has the wolf lain down with the lamb? Ridiculous!” The very idea of an
individual resurrection would have been as impossible to imagine to a Jew as to
a Greek.
Over the years, skeptics about the resurrection have proposed that the
followers of Jesus may have had hallucinations, that they may have imagined
him appearing to them and speaking to them. This assumes that their master’s
resurrection was imaginable for his Jewish followers, that it was an option in
their worldview. It was not. Others have put forth the conspiracy theory, that the
disciples stole the body and claimed he was alive to others. This assumes that the
disciples would expect other Jews to be open to the belief that an individual
could be raised from the dead. But none of this is possible. The people of that
time would have considered a bodily resurrection to be as impossible as the
people of our own time, though for different reasons.
In the first century there were many other messianic movements whose
would-be messiahs were executed. However,
In not one single case do we hear the slightest mention of the disappointed
followers claiming that their hero had been raised from the dead. They knew
better. Resurrection was not a private event. Jewish revolutionaries whose leader
had been executed by the authorities, and who managed to escape arrest
themselves, had two options: give up the revolution, or find another leader.
Claiming that the original leader was alive again was simply not an option.
Unless, of course, he was.6
There were dozens of other messianic pretenders whose lives and careers
ended the same way Jesus’s did. Why would the disciples of Jesus have come to
the conclusion that that his crucifixion had not been a defeat but a triumph—
unless they had seen him risen from the dead?
The Explosion of a New Worldview
After the death of Jesus the entire Christian community suddenly adopted a set
of beliefs that were brand-new and until that point had been unthinkable. The
first Christians had a resurrection-centered view of reality. They believed that the
future resurrection had already begun in Jesus. They believed that Jesus had a

transformed body that could walk through walls yet eat food. This was not
simply a resuscitated body like the Jews envisioned, nor a solely spiritual
existence like the Greeks imagined. Jesus’s resurrection guaranteed our
resurrection and brought some of that future new life into our hearts now.7
As N. T. Wright points out, every one of these beliefs was unique in the
world up to that time, but in every other instance that we know of, such a
massive shift in thinking at the worldview level only happens to a group of
people over a period of time.8 It ordinarily takes years of discussion and
argument in which various thinkers and writers debate the “nature of the
resurrection” until one side wins. That is how culture and worldviews change.
However, the Christian view of resurrection, absolutely unprecedented in
history, sprang up full-blown immediately after the death of Jesus. There was no
process or development. His followers said that their beliefs did not come from
debating and discussing. They were just telling others what they had seen
themselves. No one has come up with any plausible alternative to this claim.
Even if you propose the highly unlikely idea that one or two of Jesus’s disciples
did get the idea that he was raised from the dead on their own, they would never
have gotten a movement of other Jews to believe it unless there were multiple,
inexplicable, plausible, repeated encounters with Jesus.
The subsequent history of the church gets even more difficult to account for.
How could a group of first-century Jews have come to worship a human being as
divine? Eastern religions believe that God is an impersonal force that permeates
all things. Therefore they can accept the idea that some human beings have more
divine consciousness than others. Western religions believed that the various
gods often took human guise. It was possible, therefore, that some human figure
could really be Zeus or Hermes. Jews, however, believed in a single,
transcendent, personal God. It was absolute blasphemy to propose that any
human being should be worshipped. Yet hundreds of Jews began worshipping
Jesus literally overnight. The hymn to Christ as God that Paul quotes in
Philippians 2 is generally recognized to have been written just a few years after
the crucifixion. What enormous event broke through all of that Jewish
resistance? If they had seen him resurrected, that would account for it. What
other historical answer can do so?
There is one more thing to keep in mind. As Pascal put it, “I [believe] those
witnesses that get their throats cut.” Virtually all the apostles and early Christian

leaders died for their faith, and it is hard to believe that this kind of powerful
self-sacrifice would be done to support a hoax.
It is not enough for the skeptic, then, to simply dismiss the Christian
teaching about the resurrection of Jesus by saying, “It just couldn’t have
happened.” He or she must face and answer all these historical questions: Why
did Christianity emerge so rapidly, with such power? No other band of messianic
followers in that era concluded their leader was raised from the dead—why did
this group do so? No group of Jews ever worshipped a human being as God.
What led them to do it? Jews did not believe in divine men or individual
resurrections. What changed their worldview virtually overnight? How do you
account for the hundreds of eyewitnesses to the resurrection who lived on for
decades and publicly maintained their testimony, eventually giving their lives for
their belief?
The Challenge of the Resurrection
Nothing in history can be proven the way we can prove something in a
laboratory. However, the resurrection of Jesus is a historical fact much more
fully attested to than most other events of ancient history we take for granted.
Every effort to account for the birth of the church apart from Jesus’s resurrection
flies in the face of what we know about first-century history and culture. If you
don’t short-circuit the process with the philosophical bias against the possibility
of miracle, the resurrection of Jesus has the most evidence for it.
The problem is, however, that people do short-circuit the investigation.
Instead of doing the work of answering these very tough historical questions and
then following the answers where they lead, they bail out with the objection that
miracles are impossible. N. T. Wright makes a scathing response:
The early Christians did not invent the empty tomb and the meetings or sightings
of the risen Jesus…. Nobody was expecting this kind of thing; no kind of
conversion experience would have invented it, no matter how guilty (or how
forgiven) they felt, no matter how many hours they pored over the scriptures. To
suggest otherwise is to stop doing history and enter into a fantasy world of our
own.9

I sympathize with the person who says, “So what if I can’t think of an
alternate explanation? The resurrection just couldn’t happen.” Let’s not forget,
however, that first-century people felt exactly the same way. They found the
resurrection just as inconceivable as you do. The only way anyone embraced the
resurrection back then was by letting the evidence challenge and change their
worldview, their view of what was possible. They had just as much trouble with
the claims of the resurrection as you, yet the evidence—both of the eyewitness
accounts and the changed lives of Christ’s followers—was overwhelming.
Each year at Easter I get to preach on the Resurrection. In my sermon I
always say to my skeptical, secular friends that, even if they can’t believe in the
resurrection, they should want it to be true. Most of them care deeply about
justice for the poor, alleviating hunger and disease, and caring for the
environment. Yet many of them believe that the material world was caused by
accident and that the world and everything in it will eventually simply burn up in
the death of the sun. They find it discouraging that so few people care about
justice without realizing that their own worldview undermines any motivation to
make the world a better place. Why sacrifice for the needs of others if in the end
nothing we do will make any difference? If the resurrection of Jesus happened,
however, that means there’s infinite hope and reason to pour ourselves out for
the needs of the world. In a sermon, N. T. Wright said:
The message of the resurrection is that this world matters! That the injustices
and pains of this present world must now be addressed with the news that
healing, justice, and love have won…If Easter means Jesus Christ is only raised
in a spiritual sense—[then] it is only about me, and finding a new dimension in
my personal spiritual life. But if Jesus Christ is truly risen from the dead,
Christianity becomes good news for the whole world—news which warms our
hearts precisely because it isn’t just about warming hearts. Easter means that in
a world where injustice, violence and degradation are endemic, God is not
prepared to tolerate such things—and that we will work and plan, with all the
energy of God, to implement victory of Jesus over them all. Take away Easter
and Karl Marx was probably right to accuse Christianity of ignoring problems
of the material world. Take it away and Freud was probably right to say
Christianity is wish-fulfillment. Take it away and Nietzsche probably was right to
say it was for wimps.10

FOURTEEN

THE DANCE OF GOD

In 1938…I was suffering from splitting headaches; each sound hurt me like a
blow…. I discovered the poem…called “Love” [by George Herbert] which I
learnt by heart. Often, at the culminating point of a violent headache, I made
myself say it over, concentrating all my attention upon it and clinging with all my
soul to the tenderness it enshrines. I used to think I was merely reciting it as a
beautiful poem, but without my knowing it the recitation had the virtue of a
prayer. It was during one of these recitations that Christ himself came down and
took possession of me. In my arguments about the insolubility of the problem of
God I had never foreseen the possibility of that, of a real contact, person to
person, here below, between a human being and God.
—Simone Weil, Waiting for God

I believe that Christianity makes the most sense out of our individual life stories
and out of what we see in the world’s history. In the last six chapters I have been
arguing that the Christian understanding of where we came from, what’s wrong
with us, and how it can be fixed has greater power to explain what we see and
experience than does any other competing account. It is time to draw together
the various threads of the narrative we have been examining and view the story
line of Christianity as a whole. The Bible has often been summed up as a drama
in four acts—creation, fall, redemption, and restoration.
The Divine Dance
Christianity, alone among the world faiths, teaches that God is triune. The
doctrine of the Trinity is that God is one being who exists eternally in three
persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Trinity means that God is, in essence,
relational.

The gospel writer John describes the Son as living from all eternity in the
“bosom of the Father” (John 1:18), an ancient metaphor for love and intimacy.
Later in John’s gospel, Jesus, the Son, describes the Spirit as living to “glorify”
him (John 16:14). In turn, the Son glorifies the Father (17:4) and the Father, the
Son (17:5). This has been going on for all eternity (17:5b).
What does the term “glorify” mean? To glorify something or someone is to
praise, enjoy, and delight in them. When something is useful you are attracted to
it for what it can bring you or do for you. But if it is beautiful, then you enjoy it
simply for what it is. Just being in its presence is its own reward. To glorify
someone is also to serve or defer to him or her. Instead of sacrificing their
interests to make yourself happy, you sacrifice your interests to make them
happy. Why? Your ultimate joy is to see them in joy.
What does it mean, then, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit glorify one
another? If we think of it graphically, we could say that self-centeredness is to be
stationary, static. In self-centeredness we demand that others orbit around us. We
will do things and give affection to others, as long as it helps us meet our
personal goals and fulfills us.
The inner life of the triune God, however, is utterly different. The life of the
Trinity is characterized not by self-centeredness but by mutually self-giving
love. When we delight and serve someone else, we enter into a dynamic orbit
around him or her, we center on the interests and desires of the other. That
creates a dance, particularly if there are three persons, each of whom moves
around the other two. So it is, the Bible tells us. Each of the divine persons
centers upon the others. None demands that the others revolve around him. Each
voluntarily circles the other two, pouring love, delight, and adoration into them.
Each person of the Trinity loves, adores, defers to, and rejoices in the others.
That creates a dynamic, pulsating dance of joy and love. The early leaders of the
Greek church had a word for this—perichoresis. Notice our word
“choreography” within it. It means literally to “dance or flow around.”1
The Father…Son…and Holy Spirit glorify each other…. At the center of the
universe, self-giving love is the dynamic currency of the Trinitarian life of God.
The persons within God exalt, commune with, and defer to one another…. When
early Greek Christians spoke of perichoresis in God they meant that each divine
person harbors the others at the center of his being. In constant movement of

overture and acceptance each person envelops and encircles the others.2
In Christianity God is not an impersonal thing nor a static thing—not even just
one person—but a dynamic pulsating activity, a life, a kind of drama, almost, if
you will not think me irreverent, a kind of dance…. [The] pattern of this threepersonal life is…the great fountain of energy and beauty spurting up at the very
center of reality.3
The doctrine of the Trinity overloads our mental circuits. Despite its
cognitive difficulty, however, this astonishing, dynamic conception of the triune
God is bristling with profound, wonderful, life-shaping, world-changing
implications.4
The Dance of Love
If there is no God, then everything in and about us is the product of blind
impersonal forces. The experience of love may feel significant, but evolutionary
naturalists tell us that it is merely a biochemical state in the brain.
But what if there is a God? Does love fare any better? It depends on who you
think God is. If God is unipersonal, then until God created other beings there
was no love, since love is something that one person has for another. This means
that a unipersonal God was power, sovereignty, and greatness from all eternity,
but not love. Love then is not of the essence of God, nor is it at the heart of the
universe. Power is primary.
However, if God is triune, then loving relationships in community are the
“great fountain…at the center of reality.” When people say, “God is love,” I
think they mean that love is extremely important, or that God really wants us to
love. But in the Christian conception, God really has love as his essence. If he
was just one person he couldn’t have been loving for all eternity. If he was only
the impersonal all-soul of Eastern thought, he couldn’t have been loving, for
love is something persons do. Eastern religions believe the individual personality
is an illusion, and therefore love is, too.5 Chesterton wrote, “For the Buddhist…
personality is the fall of man, for the Christian it is the purpose of God, the
whole point of his cosmic idea.”6 It is the purpose of God because he is
essentially, eternally, interpersonal love.

Ultimate reality is a community of persons who know and love one another.
That is what the universe, God, history, and life is all about. If you favor money,
power, and accomplishment over human relationships, you will dash yourself on
the rocks of reality. When Jesus said you must lose yourself in service to find
yourself (Mark 8:35), he was recounting what the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
have been doing throughout eternity. You will, then, never get a sense of self by
standing still, as it were, and making everything revolve around your needs and
interests. Unless you are willing to experience the loss of options and the
individual limitation that comes from being in committed relationships, you will
remain out of touch with your own nature and the nature of things.
In many other places in this volume, I’ve traced out how impossible it is to
stay fully human if you refuse the cost of forgiveness, the substitutional
exchange of love, and the confinements of community. I quoted C. S. Lewis
saying that the only place besides heaven that is free from the pain and suffering
of relationships is hell.
Why is this? Because, according to the Bible, this world was not created by a
God who is only an individual, nor is it the emanation of an impersonal force. It
is not the product of power struggles between personal deities nor of random,
violent, accidental natural forces. Christians reject these other creation accounts,
which refuse to give love primacy. We believe the world was made by a God
who is a community of persons who have loved each other for all eternity. You
were made for mutually self-giving, other-directed love. Self-centeredness
destroys the fabric of what God has made.
The Dance of Creation
Jonathan Edwards, in reflecting on the interior life of the triune God, concluded
that God is infinitely happy. Within God is a community of persons pouring
glorifying, joyful love into one another. Think about this pattern in our own
experience. Imagine there is someone you admire more than anyone else in the
world. You would do anything for him or her. Now imagine you discover that
this person feels exactly the same about you, and you enter into either a lifetime
friendship or a romantic relationship and marriage. Sound like heaven? Yes,
because it comes from heaven—that is what God has known within himself but
in depths and degrees that are infinite and unimaginable. That is why God is
infinitely happy, because there is an “other-orientation” at the heart of his being,

because he does not seek his own glory but the glory of others.7
“But wait,” you say. “On nearly every page of the Bible God calls us to
glorify, praise, and serve him. How can you say he doesn’t seek his own glory?”
Yes he does ask us to obey him unconditionally, to glorify, praise, and center our
lives around him. But now, I hope, you finally see why he does that. He wants
our joy! He has infinite happiness not through self-centeredness, but through
self-giving, other-centered love. And the only way we, who have been created in
his image, can have this same joy, is if we center our entire lives around him
instead of ourselves.
Why would a God like this create a world of beings like us? On the basis of
Biblical passages such as John 17:20-24, Jonathan Edwards reasoned it out.
Historian George Marsden summarizes Edwards’s idea:
Why would such an infinitely good, perfect, and eternal being create?…Here
Edwards drew on the Christian Trinitarian conception of God as essentially
interpersonal…. The ultimate reason that God creates, said Edwards, is not to
remedy some lack in God, but to extend that perfect internal communication of
the triune God’s goodness and love…. God’s joy and happiness and delight in
divine perfections is expressed externally by communicating that happiness and
delight to created beings…. The universe is an explosion of God’s glory. Perfect
goodness, beauty, and love radiate from God and draw creatures to ever
increasingly share in the Godhead’s joy and delight…. The ultimate end of
creation, then, is union in love between God and loving creatures.8
God did not create us to get the cosmic, infinite joy of mutual love and
glorification, but to share it. We were made to join in the dance. If we will center
our lives on him, serving him not out of self-interest, but just for the sake of who
he is, for the sake of his beauty and glory, we will enter the dance and share in
the joy and love he lives in. We were designed, then, not just for belief in God in
some general way, nor for a vague kind of inspiration or spirituality. We were
made to center our lives upon him, to make the purpose and passion of our lives
knowing, serving, delighting, and resembling him. This growth in happiness will
go on eternally, increasing unimaginably (1 Corinthians 2:7-10).
This leads to a uniquely positive view of the material world. The world is
not, as other creation accounts would have it, an illusion, the result of a battle

among the gods, nor the accidental outcome of natural forces. It was made in joy
and therefore is good in and of itself. The universe is understood as a dance of
beings united by energies binding yet distinct, like planets orbiting stars, like
tides and seasons, “like atoms in a molecule, like the tones in a chord, like the
living organisms on this earth, like the mother with the baby stirring in her
body.”9 The love of the inner life of the Trinity is written all through it. Creation
is a dance!
Losing the Dance
The story of the Bible begins with the dance of creation, but in Genesis 3 we
read of the Fall. God tells Adam and Eve that they must not eat of one tree on
penalty of death. But what would be so bad about eating of this tree? No answer
is forthcoming. However, if we comply with God’s directions only when it fits in
with our goals and interests, then we are trying to get God to orbit around us.
God becomes means to an end, not an end in himself. God, then, is saying to
humanity something like, “Obey me about the tree just because you love me.
Just for my sake.”
And we failed. We became stationary, self-centered. And according to
Genesis 3, when our relationship with God unraveled, all our other relationships
disintegrated as well. Self-centeredness creates psychological alienation.
Nothing makes us more miserable than self-absorption, the endless, unsmiling
concentration on our needs, wants, treatment, ego, and record. In addition, selfcenteredness leads to social disintegration. It is at the root of the breakdown in
relationships between nations, races and classes, and individuals. Finally, in
some mysterious way, humanity’s refusal to serve God has led to our alienation
from the natural world as well.
We lost the dance. The dance of joyful, mutually self-giving relationships is
impossible in a world in which everyone is stationary, trying to get everything
else to orbit around them.
However, God does not leave us there. The Son of God was born into the
world to begin a new humanity, a new community of people who could lose their
self-centeredness, begin a God-centered life, and, as a result, slowly but surely
have all other relationships put right as well. Paul calls Jesus “the last Adam.”
As the first Adam was tested in the Garden of Eden, the last Adam (Jesus) was

tested in the Garden of Gethsemane. The first Adam knew that he would live if
he obeyed God about the tree. But he didn’t. The last Adam was also tested by
what Paul called a “tree,” the Cross. Jesus knew that he would be crushed if he
obeyed his Father. And he still did.
Why did Jesus die for us? What was Jesus getting out of it? Remember, he
already had a community of joy, glory, and love. He didn’t need us. So what
benefit did he derive from this? Not a thing. And that means that when he came
into the world and died on the cross to deal with our sins, he was circling and
serving us. “I have given them the glory that you gave me” (John 17). He began
to do with us what he had been doing with the Father and the Spirit from all
eternity. He centers upon us, loving us without benefit to himself.
Returning to the Dance
If the beauty of what Jesus did moves you, that is the first step toward getting
out of your own self-centeredness and fear into a trust relationship with him.
When Jesus died for you he was, as it were, inviting you into the dance. He
invites you to begin centering everything in your life on him, even as he has
given himself for you.
If you respond to him, all your relationships will begin to heal. As I noted in
Chapter 9, sin is centering your identity on anything but God. We give ourselves
only to relationships and pursuits that build us up and bolster our efforts at selfjustification and self-creation. But this also leads us to disdain and look down on
those who do not have the same accomplishments or identity-markers.
However, when we discern Jesus moving toward us and encircling us with
an infinite, self-giving love, we are invited to put our lives on a whole new
foundation. We can make him the new center of our lives and stop trying to be
our own Savior and Lord. We can accept both his challenge to recognize
ourselves as sinners in need of his salvation, and his renewing love as the new
basis of our identity. Then we don’t need to prove ourselves to others. We won’t
need to use others to bolster our fragile sense of pride and self-worth. And we
will be enabled to move out toward others as Jesus has moved toward us.
In self-giving, if anywhere, we touch a rhythm not only of all creation but of all
being. For the Eternal Word also gives himself in sacrifice. When he was

crucified he “did that in the wild weather of his outlying provinces which He had
done at home in glory and gladness” from before the foundation of the world….
From the highest to the lowest exists to be abdicated and, by that abdication, it
becomes more truly self, to be thereupon yet the more abdicated, and so forever.
This is not a…law which we can escape…. What is outside the system of selfgiving is…simply and solely Hell…that fierce imprisonment in the self…. Selfgiving is absolute reality.10
The Future of the Dance
How, then, will the story of human history end? At the end of the final book of
the Bible, we see the very opposite of what other religions predict. We do not see
the illusion of the world melt away nor do we see spiritual souls escaping the
physical world into heaven. Rather, we see heaven descending into our world to
unite with it and purify it of all its brokenness and imperfection. It will be a
“new heavens and new earth.” The prophet Isaiah depicts this as a new Garden
of Eden, in which there is again absolute harmony of humanity with nature and
the end of injury, disease, and death, along with the end of all racial animosity
and war. There will be no more poor, slaves, criminals, or broken-hearted
mourners.
This all follows from what we know about creation as a dance. The Trinity
virtually “rejoiced” the world into being. Out of delight God created a universe
of beings to step into his joy, and the new-made stars sang of it. Even now
creation continually tells of God’s glory and looks to him, it “shouts for joy and
sings” (Psalms 65:12-13). God moves toward his world in care and love. He is
committed to every part of his creation, loving it and upholding it. And though
sin and evil have marred the world, so it is just a shadow of its true self, at the
end of time, nature will be restored to its full glory and we with it. “Creation
itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the glorious
freedom of the children of God” (Romans 8:21). The whole world will be healed
as it is drawn into the fullness of God’s glory. Evil will be destroyed and all the
potentialities in creation, latent until that moment, will explode into fullness and
beauty. Compared to what we will be then, we are now mere vegetables. Even
the trees will sing and make music before the face of the returning King, who, by
his presence, always turns mourning into dancing.
Because creation was made in the image of a God who is equally one and

many, the human race will finally be reunited and yet our racial and cultural
diversity will remain intact in the renewed world. The human race finally lives
together in peace and interdependence. Glory to God in the highest goes with
peace on earth.
The Christian Life
How do we respond to this? When we look at the whole scope of this story line,
we see clearly that Christianity is not only about getting one’s individual sins
forgiven so we can go to heaven. That is an important means of God’s salvation,
but not the final end or purpose of it. The purpose of Jesus’s coming is to put the
whole world right, to renew and restore the creation, not to escape it. It is not
just to bring personal forgiveness and peace, but also justice and shalom to the
world. God created both body and soul, and the resurrection of Jesus shows that
he is going to redeem both body and soul. The work of the Spirit of God is not
only to save souls but also to care and cultivate the face of the earth, the material
world.
It is hard to overemphasize the uniqueness of this vision. Outside of the
Bible, no other major religious faith holds out any hope or even interest in the
restoration of perfect shalom, justice, and wholeness in this material world.
Vinoth Ramachandra, a Sri Lankan Christian writer, can see this very clearly. All
other religions, he says, offer as salvation some form of liberation from ordinary
humanness. Salvation is seen as escape from the shackles of individuality and
physical embodiment into some kind of transcendent spiritual existence.
[Biblical] salvation lies not in an escape from this world but in the
transformation of this world…. You will not find hope for the world in any of the
religious systems or philosophies of humankind…. The Biblical vision is unique.
That is why when some say there is salvation in other faiths too, I ask them
—“What salvation are you talking about?” No faith holds out a promise of
eternal salvation for the world—the ordinary world—that the cross and
resurrection of Jesus do.11
What does it mean, then, to become part of God’s work in the world? What
does it mean to live a Christian life? One way to answer that question is to look
back into the life of the Trinity and the original creation. God made us to ever

increasingly share in his own joy and delight in the same way he has joy and
delight within himself. We share his joy first as we give him glory (worshipping
and serving him rather than ourselves); second, as we honor and serve the
dignity of other human beings made in the image of God’s glory; and third, as
we cherish his derivative glory in the world of nature, which also reflects it. We
glorify and enjoy him only as we worship him, serve the human community, and
care for the created environment.
Another way to look at the Christian life, however, is to see it from the
perspective of the final restoration. The world and our hearts are broken. Jesus’s
life, death, and resurrection was an infinitely costly rescue operation to restore
justice to the oppressed and marginalized, physical wholeness to the diseased
and dying, community to the isolated and lonely, and spiritual joy and
connection to those alienated from God. To be a Christian today is to become
part of that same operation, with the expectation of suffering and hardship and
the joyful assurance of eventual success.
The story of the gospel makes sense of moral obligation and our belief in the
reality of justice, so Christians do restorative and redistributive justice wherever
they can. The story of the gospel makes sense of our indelible religiousness, so
Christians do evangelism, pointing the way to forgiveness and reconciliation
with God through Jesus. The gospel makes sense of our profoundly relational
character, so Christians work sacrificially to strengthen human communities
around them as well as the Christian community, the church. The gospel story
also makes sense of our delight in the presence of beauty, so Christians become
stewards of the material world, from those who cultivate the natural creation
through science and gardening to those who give themselves to artistic
endeavors, all knowing why these things are necessary for human flourishing.
The skies and trees “sing” of the glory of God, and by caring for them and
celebrating them we free their voices to praise him and delight us. In short, the
Christian life means not only building up the Christian community through
encouraging people to faith in Christ, but building up the human community
through deeds of justice and service.
Christians, then, are the true “revolutionaries” who work for justice and
truth, and we labor in expectation of a perfect world in which:
He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or
mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things is passed away.

(Revelation 21:4)
And when we get there, we will say, I’ve come home at last! This is my real
country! I belong here. This is the land I’ve been looking for all my life, though I
never knew it! And it will by no means be the end of our story. In fact, as C. S.
Lewis put it, all the adventures we have ever had will end up being only “the
cover and the title page.” Finally we will be begin “Chapter One of the Great
Story, which no one on earth has read; which goes on forever; in which every
chapter is better than the one before.”12

EPILOGUE
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?

To know oneself, is above all, to know what one lacks. It is to measure oneself
against the Truth, and not the other way around.
—Flannery O’Connor, “The Fiction Writer and His Country”
And then the heart of Eowyn changed, or else at last she understood it.
—J. R. R. Tolkien, The Return of the King

IT is possible though by no means certain that Christianity may be more
plausible to you now that you’ve read this book. You may have been personally
moved by some of the descriptions of our world’s need, your own condition, and
Christ’s mission in the world. What if you are ready to explore what it means to
put your faith in Christ? Where do you go from here?
Examining Your Motives
Motivations are nearly always mixed. If you wait until your motives are pure and
unselfish before you do something, you will wait forever. Nevertheless, it is
important to ask what is primarily moving you toward an action, especially when
it comes to faith commitment. For example, you may be at a time of great
difficulty and need. You are sharply conscious, maybe for the first time in your
life, that you need God and some kind of spiritual help in order to make it.
There’s nothing mistaken about that, but it would be very easy in that condition
to approach God as a means to an end. Are you getting into Christianity to serve
God, or to get God to serve you? The latter is a kind shamanism, an effort to get
control of God through your prayers and practices. It is using God rather than
trusting him.

We have to recognize that virtually all of us begin our journey toward God
because we want something from him. However, we must come to grips with the
fact that we owe him our entire lives just because of what he has done for us
already. He is our Creator, and for that fact alone we owe him everything.
However, he is also our Redeemer, who rescued us at infinite cost to himself.
Any heart that has come to its senses wants to surrender to Someone who not
only is all-powerful but has proved that he will sacrifice anything for our good.
We usually begin the journey toward God thinking, “What do I have to do to
get this or that from him?” but eventually we have to begin thinking, “What do I
have to do to get him?” If you don’t make that transition, you will never actually
meet the real God, but will only end up believing in some caricature version of
him.
Counting the Cost
A Christian is, literally, “Christ’s one,” someone who is not just vaguely
influenced by Christian teaching, but who has switched his or her most
fundamental allegiance to Jesus. Christians understand the all-or-nothing choice
that is forced upon us by the magnitude of Jesus’s claims.
From the earliest days, the confession of Christians was Christos Kurios
—“Jesus is Lord.” In the historical context, in which it was required to say
Kaiser Kurios, “Caesar is Lord,” this confession meant that Jesus was the
supreme power. He was not just a divine angelic being, but, as an early Christian
hymn put it, he had “the name above every name” (Philippians 2:9). In him “All
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily” (Colossians 2:9).
This is an enormous claim, but there is a certain logic to it. One of the most
recent people to note this logic is Bono, the lead singer of U2, in a conversation
with Michka Assayas:
Assayas: Christ has his rank among the world’s great thinkers. But Son of God,
isn’t that far-fetched?
Bono: No, it’s not far-fetched to me. Look, the secular response to the Christ
story always goes like this: He was a great prophet, obviously a very
interesting guy, had a lot to say along the lines of other great prophets, be

they Elijah, Muhammad, Buddha, or Confucius. But actually Christ doesn’t
allow you that. He doesn’t let you off that hook. Christ says, No. I’m not
saying I’m a teacher, don’t call me teacher. I’m not saying I’m a prophet. I’m
saying: “I’m the Messiah.” I’m saying: “I am God incarnate.” And people
say: No, no, please, just be a prophet. A prophet we can take. You’re a bit
eccentric. We’ve had John the Baptist eating locusts and wild honey, we can
handle that. But don’t mention the “M” word! Because, you know, we’re
gonna have to crucify you. And he goes: No, no, I know you’re expecting me
to come back with an army and set you free from these creeps, but actually I
am the Messiah. At this point, everyone starts staring at their shoes, and
says: Oh, my God, he’s gonna keep saying this. So what you’re left with is
either Christ was who He said He was—the Messiah—or a complete
nutcase. I mean, we’re talking nutcase on the level of Charles Manson….
I’m not joking here. The idea that the entire course of civilization for over
half of the globe could have its fate changed and turned upside-down by a
nutcase, for me that’s far-fetched…
Bono is describing how Jesus’s statements about himself force us all into an
all-or-nothing choice. He asks how likely it is that a mentally deranged man on
the order of Charles Manson or David Koresh could have produced the kind of
impact on his followers and on the world that he has. However, if Jesus was not
a lunatic, then our only alternative is to accept his claims and center our entire
lives around him. The one thing we have no right to do is to respond to him
mildly.
Flannery O’Connor makes the same point in “A Good Man Is Hard to Find.”
The Misfit is a bandit who apprehends a family in a rural area in the South. The
head of the family, the grandmother, tries to talk him out of killing her by
chattering on about prayer and church and Jesus, but the Misfit responds:
Jesus…thrown everything off balance. If He did what He said, then it’s nothing
for you to do but throw away everything and follow Him, and if He didn’t, then
it’s nothing for you to do but enjoy the few minutes you got left the best way you
can by killing somebody or burning down his house or doing some other
meanness to him. No pleasure but meanness.
O’Connor once commented about this encounter saying that the Misfit
indeed understood the all-or-nothing implications of Jesus. “The story is a duel

of sorts between the grandmother and her superficial beliefs and the Misfit’s
more profoundly felt involvement with Christ’s action, which set the world off
balance for him.”1 O’Connor felt this pressure personally. There was no use just
saying you believed in Jesus unless you let that change your life and affect your
view of everything. “Redemption is meaningless unless there is a cause for it in
the actual life we live,” she wrote in an essay, “I see from the standpoint of
Christian orthodoxy. This means that for me the meaning of life is centered in
our redemption by Christ and what I see in the world I see in its relation to
that.”2
Bono and O’Connor are extremely different personalities, and yet both of
them have personally felt the radical implications of Jesus’s claims. Christians
are people who let the reality of Jesus change everything about who they are,
how they see, and how they live.
Taking Inventory
Perhaps these challenges from Bono and O’Connor make you gulp. What if you
are increasingly respectful of and interested in Christianity but you are not yet
ready to make such a big commitment? You may sense that there are still barriers
between you and Christian faith.
If that is your situation don’t simply put things on hold, hoping that
somehow your feelings will change and somehow the barriers will melt away.
Take an inventory in order to discern the specific reasons for your reservations.
Here is a possible set of questions to help you in this process.
Content issues: Are there any parts of the Christian message—
creation, sin, Jesus as God, Cross, resurrection—that you don’t
understand or agree with?
Coherence issues: Are there still doubts and objections to the Christian
faith that you cannot resolve?
Cost issues: Do you perceive that a move into full Christian faith will
cost you something dear? What fears do you have about commitment?
You can use an outline like this to analyze and identify your barriers to full
commitment, but don’t trust yourself to do this on your own. Almost anything—

from a new language to a new skill—is best learned in a community of others
who are at various stages in their own pilgrimage. Spend time in a Christian
church, in its worship and in friendship with its members, to talk with Christians
and to hear how they have handled these doubts themselves.
Most important of all, remember that becoming a Christian is not simply a
matter of ticking off a list of things to believe and do. At the end of Matthew 11,
Jesus calls us to “Come to me, all you who are weary and heavy laden and I will
give you rest…. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me…. For my yoke is
easy and my burden is light.” A man once said to a pastor that he would be
happy to believe in Christianity if the cleric could only give him a watertight
argument for its truth. The pastor replied, “What if God hasn’t given us a
watertight argument, but rather a watertight person?”3 Jesus is saying “I am that
person. Come to me. Look at who I am. Look at my Cross. Look at my
resurrection. No one could have made this up! Come to me, and you will find
rest for your souls.”
Ultimately faith and certainty grows as we get to know more about Jesus,
who he is, and what he did.
There’s one more barrier that many people feel at this point may not be as
hard to deal with as you think. New York City is filled with people who were
raised and baptized in various churches but who abandoned their faith in their
teens and college and have not thought much about it for years. Then something
brings them up short and they find themselves in spiritual search mode. They
work through the basics of the Christian faith and it seems to them they had
never really understood it before. Their question to me as a pastor is “I don’t
really know if I am a Christian or not. Am I returning to my faith or finding it for
the first time?” The answer is simple—I can’t tell, and it doesn’t matter. If you
want to either connect to God or reconnect to God, you have to do the same two
things. What are those two things?
Making the Move
The first thing you have to do is repent. That’s not a very elegant sounding word
but there is no getting around it. The repentance that begins a new relationship
with God is not primarily a matter of drawing up lists of specific sins you are
sorry for and want to change. Don’t get me wrong: If you are gouging the poor

or cheating on your spouse, and you want to put your faith in Christ, then by all
means stop doing those things. A Christian should love the poor and be faithful
to his or her marriage vows. But those behavioral changes alone will not make
you a Christian. Lots of people in the world are socially and personally ethical
but do not have a relationship with God through Jesus Christ. Repentance is not
less than being sorry for individual sins, but it means much more.
The repentance that really changes your heart and your relationship with
God begins when you recognize that your main sin, the sin under the rest of your
sins, is your self-salvation project. As we saw in Chapters 9 and 10, in both our
bad deeds and in our good deeds we are seeking to be our own Saviors and
Lords. We have alternative trusts and “gods,” even though we do not call them
that. We try to prove ourselves by our moral goodness or through achievement or
family or career. Even diligent involvement in church and religion may need to
be repented of once we understand that it was all a way to put God and others in
our debt.
Repentance, then, is confessing the things besides God himself that you have
been relying on for your hope, significance, and security. That means we should
repent not only for things we have done wrong (like cheating or lying), but also
for the motivations beneath our good works.
The second thing you have to do is believe in Christ. Belief in Christ has a
definite content to it. We must believe he was who he said he was, that we
require salvation, that on the Cross he secured that salvation, that he rose from
the dead. However, while life-changing Christian faith is not less than believing
these things with your intellect, it is much more.
The faith that changes the life and connects to God is best conveyed by the
word “trust.” Imagine you are on a high cliff and you lose your footing and
begin to fall. Just beside you as you fall is a branch sticking out of the very edge
of the cliff. It is your only hope and it is more than strong enough to support
your weight. How can it save you? If your mind is filled with intellectual
certainty that the branch can support you, but you don’t actually reach out and
grab it, you are lost. If your mind is instead filled with doubts and uncertainty
that the branch can hold you, but you reach out and grab it anyway, you will be
saved. Why? It is not the strength of your faith but the object of your faith that
actually saves you. Strong faith in a weak branch is fatally inferior to weak faith
in a strong branch.

This means you don’t have to wait for all doubts and fears to go away to take
hold of Christ. Don’t make the mistake of thinking that you have to banish all
misgivings in order to meet God. That would turn your faith into one more way
to be your own Savior. Working on the quality and purity of your commitment
would become a way to merit salvation and put God in your debt. It is not the
depth and purity of your heart but the work of Jesus Christ on our behalf that
saves us.
Faith, then, begins as you recognize and reject your alternative trusts and
gods and turn instead to the Father, asking for a relationship to him on the basis
of what Jesus has done, not on the basis of your moral effort or achievements.
Several young adults of my acquaintance made their move of faith this way.
They prayed:
Father, I’ve always believed in you and Jesus Christ, but my heart’s most
fundamental trust was elsewhere—in my own competence and decency. This has
only gotten me into trouble. As far as I know my own heart, today I give it to you,
I transfer my trust to you, and ask that you would receive and accept me not for
anything I have done but because of everything Christ has done for me.
This begins a lifelong process in which, through steady change in every area
of life, the gospel story shapes us more and more.
Committing to Community
When people ask me “How can I actually become a Christian?” I usually say, “It
takes two things, and a third.” The two things—repentance and faith—I have just
laid out. There is another crucial aspect, however. Why not just say that there are
actually three things, then? I would prefer to say “two and a third” because the
third is not so much a third thing as it is the way you do the first two.
Becoming a Christian always has both an individual and a corporate aspect.
People in Western cultures underestimate the degree to which they are the
product not of their personal choices but of their families, communities, and
cultures. Therefore, repentance and faith must be done both individually and
communally. We do them when we personally approach God in prayer (as in the
previous examples), and also when we publicly identify with Christ by becoming
part of the church.

The gospel of Luke tells us that Jesus was crucified between two robbers
who were also being executed. One hurled abuse at Jesus, but the second said to
the first, “We are punished justly, for we are getting what our deeds deserve. But
this man has done nothing wrong.” Under the circumstances this was remarkable
insight. The thief perceived that Jesus was innocent, dying for the guilty. Then
he turned and said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.”
He was putting all his trust and hope in Jesus, that he would be bringing about a
future kingdom, a new heaven and new earth. The moment he put his trust in
Christ, Jesus assured him, “I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in
paradise” (Luke 23:41-43).
I recount this because this incident makes it clear that a person can be
assured of belonging to Christ the very moment he or she makes that personal
heart transaction with God. Nevertheless, everything in the New Testament
indicates that Christians should confirm and seal that personal commitment
through public, communal action in baptism and becoming part of the church.
Hearts are unruly things, and to be sure that we have put our heart-trust in Jesus
rather than in other things, we need to follow through and join a body of
believers.
I realize that so many people’s main problem with Christianity has far more
to do with the church than with Jesus. They don’t want to be told that to become
a Christian and live a Christian life they need to find a church they can thrive in.
They’ve had too many bad experiences with churches. I fully understand. I will
grant that, on the whole, churchgoers may be weaker psychologically and
morally than non-churchgoers. That should be no more surprising than the fact
that people sitting in a doctor’s office are on the whole sicker than those who are
not there. Churches rightly draw a higher proportion of needy people. They also
have a great number of people whose lives have been completely turned around
and filled by the joy of Christ.
The church of Jesus Christ is therefore like the ocean. It is enormous and
diverse. Like the ocean there are warm and clear spots and deadly cold spots,
places you can enter easily without danger and places where it will immediately
whisk you away and kill you. I realize how risky it is to tell my readers that they
should seek out a church. I don’t do it lightly, and I urge them to do so with the
utmost care. But there is no alternative. You can’t live the Christian life without
a band of Christian friends, without a family of believers in which you find a

place.
The Trauma of Grace
When people ask, “How do I become a Christian?” it is important to give a
concrete answer. It is also dangerous to give the impression that finding God is
basically a technique, something that is basically up to us. Certainly we should
be very active in seeking God, and Jesus himself called us to “ask, seek, knock”
in order to find him. Yet those who enter a relationship with God inevitably look
back and recognize that God’s grace had sought them out, breaking them open to
new realities. In some way that you would never expect, the reality of your own
fallen nature and God’s radical grace breaks through. You realize that your very
efforts to be good or happy or authentic have been part of the problem. The
penny drops and you see things differently, but you never know how this is
going to happen. I could show this in a hundred famous spiritual biographies,
such as those of St. Paul, Augustine, Martin Luther, John Wesley, or in a
thousand testimonies of life change in my own congregation. But my favorite
example of the trauma of grace is the one depicted by Flannery O’Connor in her
short story “Revelation.”
The story begins in a doctor’s office, where Mrs. Turpin and her husband,
Claud, are waiting with others for their appointments. Mrs. Turpin spends her
time sizing up and feeling superior to virtually all the types of people—the races,
classes, body types, and temperaments—represented by those in the room. She is
very smug and self-righteous, but in a very believable way. O’Connor skillfully
depicts Mrs. Turpin’s judgmental thought processes about others in a way that is
uncomfortably familiar.
She begins a conversation with another woman who is there with her
daughter, a girl named Mary Grace, who is reading a book. As she talks, Mrs.
Turpin’s enormous self-satisfaction and condescension toward others comes out.
Mary Grace, though saying nothing, scowls and grimaces as the woman blathers
on and on. Finally, Mrs. Turpin exclaims:
If it’s one thing I am, it’s grateful. When I think who all I could have been besides
myself and what all I got, I just feel like shouting, “Thank you, Jesus, for making
everything the way it is!” It could have been different!…Oh thank you, Jesus,
thank you!

At that very moment, Mary Grace explodes. She heaves the book she is
reading (entitled Human Development) at Mrs. Turpin, hitting her in the eye. She
crashes across a table, puts her fingers around her throat, and begins to choke
her. Mary Grace then has an epileptic fit, and as others restrain her the stunned
Mrs. Turpin leans over her. “‘What have you got to say to me?’ she asked
hoarsely and held her breath, waiting, as for a revelation.” At one level, she is
asking for an apology, but at another level she begins to realize that the girl is a
messenger of God’s grace. Mary Grace looks up and says, “Go back to hell
where you came from, you old wart hog!”
The revelation had reached its target, but Mrs. Turpin now has to change her
worldview in accordance with it. Later that day she is alone with her thoughts
out by her own hog pen. “What do you send a message like that for?” she
snarled at God. “How am I a hog and me both? How am I saved and from hell
too?” Centuries before, Martin Luther had learned, in no less a traumatic way,
that God saves by grace, not by good works. He realized that a Christian is simul
iustus et peccator (simultaneously just and accepted—in Christ, by his grace
alone) and yet peccator, a sinner. Saved and a warthog from hell at the same
time.
However Mrs. Turpin, like Martin Luther, resists the revelation of God’s
grace at first. “Why me?” she rumbled. “It’s no trash around here, black or
white, that I haven’t given to. And break my back to the bone every day
working. And do for the church. If you like trash better, go get yourself some
trash then…. Exactly how am I like them?…I could quit working and take it
easy and be filthy,” she growled. “Lounge about the sidewalks all day drinking
root beer. Dip snuff and spit in every puddle and have it all over my face. I could
be nasty.” A final surge of fury shakes her and she cries out to God, “Who do you
think you are?”
At that moment the sun sets and she sees a purple streak in the sky.
A visionary light settled in her eyes. She saw…a vast swinging bridge extending
upward from the earth through a field of living fire. Upon it a vast horde of souls
were rumbling toward heaven. There were whole companies of…trash…and
battalions of freaks and lunatics shouting and clapping and leaping like frogs.
[But at the] end was a tribe of people whom she recognized at once as those
who, like herself and Claud, had always had a little of everything and the Godgiven wit to use it right…. They were marching behind the others with great

dignity, accountable as they had always been for good order and common sense
and respectable behavior. They alone were on key. Yet she could see by their
shocked and altered faces that even their virtues were being burned away…. In a
moment the vision faded…. In the woods around her the invisible cricket
choruses had struck up, but what she heard were the voices of the souls climbing
upward into the starry field and shouting hallelujah.4
What a radical idea! The “freaks and lunatics” going to heaven before the
morally upright tribe? But Jesus said the same thing, when he announced to the
shocked religious leaders of his day, “I tell you the truth, the tax collectors and
the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you” (Matthew 21:31).
WHAT IF YOU HAVE REACHED the end of this book and, as the result of reading it,
you wish you could have faith but you don’t? The writer Joseph Epstein once
admitted that he envied people with the kind of intelligent, deep faith that can
see them through the darkest crises. In particular, he was amazed at how
Flannery O’Connor’s Christian faith enabled her to face an early death due to
lupus without complaint or fear. But, he concluded, “Faith envy is envy, alas,
about which one can do nothing but quietly harbor it.”5 I appreciate Epstein’s
respect for the mystery of faith. It is not something you can create in yourself
through a technique. However, is there really nothing to do?
During a dark time in her life, a woman in my congregation complained that
she had prayed over and over, “God, help me find you,” but had gotten nowhere.
A Christian friend suggested to her that she might change her prayer to, “God,
come and find me. After all, you are the Good Shepherd who goes looking for
the lost sheep.” She concluded when she was recounting this to me, “The only
reason I can tell you this story is—he did.”
• • •
For a complete list of this author’s books click here or visit
www.penguin.com/kellerchecklist

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to thank the people and leaders of Redeemer Presbyterian Church, and
especially the many inquirers, strugglers, and critics I have met there over the
years. This book is nothing but the record of what I’ve learned from them.
Thanks to Jill Lamar for her longtime encouragement and support for my
writing. Also, thanks to David McCormick, a great agent, Brian Tart, an
awesome editor, Nathaniel Calhoun, Jennifer Samuels, David Negren, Lynn
Land, Jim and Susie Lane, Janice Worth, and Nicole Diamond-Austin, the
Round Robin women and their spouses, and my three sons—David, Michael,
and Jonathan—for lending so much support and so many great suggestions as I
wrote this over the last four years.
I also owe a deeper sort of acknowledgment to the three people to whom I
am most indebted for the fundamental shape of my Christian faith. They are, in
order, my wife, Kathy, the British author C. S. Lewis, and the American
theologian Jonathan Edwards.
Lewis’s words appear in nearly every chapter. It would be wrong not to
admit how much of what I think about faith comes from him. Edwards’s words
appear more seldom, because he has contributed more to the underlying structure
of what could be called my “theology.” Nevertheless, Lewis’s and Edwards’s
thoughts agree and converge in this book in surprising ways. For example,
Chapter 13 on the Dance of God is as indebted to one as to the other.
My wife, Kathy, never gets footnoted, yet she is the main author of the faith
and thought of this author. She put me on to Lewis, to Edwards and Reformed
theology, and to the importance of prayer, social justice, and the city. When you
are that foundational to someone’s world-and life-view, you get mentioned in the
acknowledgments, but not in the footnotes. The main reason I am putting this

book into print is because she likes it. “The praise of the praiseworthy is above
all rewards.”

NOTES

Introduction

1. See the report “One in Three Adults Is Unchurched” (March 28, 2005) at the
George Barna Group. In Europe, the number of people not attending church has
plunged even more precipitously, with British church attendance somewhere in
between. See Grace Davie, “Europe: The Exception that Proves the Rule?” in
Peter L. Berger, ed. The Desecularization of the World: Resurgent Religion and
World Politics (Eerdmans, 1999) and Peter Brierly, The Tide Is Running Out
(Christian Research, 2000).
2. Ross Douthat, “Crises of Faith,” The Atlantic Monthly, July/August 2007.

3. George Marsden, The Soul of the American University: From Protestant
Establishment to Established Non-belief (Oxford University Press, 1999).

4. Source: Peter Berger at the Pew Forum Faith Angle Conference, “Religion in
a Globalizing World,” December 4, 2006, Key West, Florida. Transcript
accessed at http://pewforum.org/events/index.php?EventID=136. See also
Douthat, “Crises of Faith,” The Atlantic Monthly (July/August 2007). Douthat
picks up on the same data that Berger notes, showing that contrary to widespread
impressions, Europe is gradually growing more religious while America is
becoming more deeply divided between the religious and the secular. Both these

trends, he says, mean ongoing cultural and political conflict and extremism on
both sides.

5. “Defending the Faith,” by Douglas Groothuis, Books and Culture
(July/August 2003): 12. See Quentin Smith, “The Metaphilosophy of
Naturalism,” Philo 4, no. 2 at www.philoonline.org/library/smith_4_2.htm.
Today the Society of Christian Philosophers (founded in 1978) includes more
than 10 percent of all the teachers and professors of philosophy in the country.
For more on this see K. Clark, Philosophers Who Believe (Oxford University
Press).

6. “One University Under God?” The Chronicle of Higher Education: Careers,
January 7, 2005.

7. For a good overview, read the entire transcript of the Peter Berger–led Pew
Forum referenced above.

8. “A New Jerusalem,” The Economist, September 21, 2006.

9. It is often agreed that a “fact” is either a) something that is self-evident to
virtually everyone (e.g., “There’s a rock in the road”) or b) something that is not
self-evident to the senses but can be proved scientifically. If we hold to
something that can’t be demonstrated in either of those ways then it is a “belief”
or an act of faith.

10. For a good short summary of why we are all “believers,” see Christian
Smith, “Believing Animals,” Moral Believing Animals: Human Personhood and
Culture (Oxford University Press, 2003).

11. Each Easter at Redeemer we ask members to share the personal accounts of
their faith journeys. These are a selection from Easter 2006. Used with
permission.

ONE—There Can’t Be Just One True Religion

1. The quotes at the beginning of each chapter are taken from an e-mail survey
of young New Yorkers in their mid-twenties who were asked to articulate their
main doubts and objections to Christianity. I’ve changed the names. Thanks to
Nicole Diamond-Austin for the idea and the execution of the survey.

2. The recent wave of bestselling anti-religion books by Richard Dawkins, Sam
Harris, Daniel Dennett, and Christopher Hitchens do not recommend that
religion be outlawed, but only because they don’t think that strategy is workable.
Their main hope is for religion to be so strongly condemned, ridiculed, and
formally privatized that it becomes weakened and marginalized.

3. Alister McGrath, The Twilight of Atheism: The Rise and Fall of Disbelief in
the Modern World (Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 230. See also pp. 187,
235.

4. Many prominent thinkers in the mid-twentieth century believed that by the
time their grandchildren were their age most religions would have waned or died
out. As an example, an anthropologist could write in 1966: “The evolutionary
future of religion is extinction…. Belief in supernatural powers is doomed to die
out, all over the world, as the result of the increasing adequacy and diffusion of
scientific knowledge.” A. F. C. Wallace, Religion: An Anthropological View

(Random House, 1966), p. 265.
5. For some account of how sociologists have backed away from the
secularization thesis, see Peter L. Berger, ed., The Desecularization of the World:
Resurgent Religion and World Politics (Eerdmans, 1999).
6. On the growth of Christianity in the non-Western world, see Philip Jenkins,
The Next Christendom (Oxford University Press, 2002) and Lamin Sanneh,
Whose Religion Is Christianity? (Eerdmans, 2003).
7. Joe Klein, “Because I Promised and You Seemed So Darn Curious…” on the
Time magazine blog, March 7, 2007. Accessed that date at http://timeblog.com/swampland/2007/03/because_i_promised_and_you_see.html.
8. Lesslie Newbigin, The Gospel in a Pluralist Society (Eerdmans, 1989), pp. 9–
10, 170.
9. Peter Berger, A Rumor of Angels: Modern Society and the Rediscovery of the
Supernatural (Doubleday, 1969), p. 40.
10. There are many sophisticated critiques that demonstrate the self-refuting
nature of relativism. Just one example is H. Siegel, Relativism Refuted: A
Critique of Contemporary Epistemological Relativism (Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1987). There is a very influential view that claims “truth” only exists within a
particular framework of beliefs and that each is of equal value because there is
no framework-transcending criterion by which to adjudicate between all the
truth-claims. A more postmodern version of this claim is the assertion that reality
is “language-ridden” and every truth-claim is nothing but the insights of a
particular linguistic community. But, as Siegel points out, to say that all reality
accounts are language-ridden and relative to their own linguistic communities is
itself a universal account of the working of language across all communities and
therefore is a claim about the human condition as such. The relativists’ own view
of things does not give them the right to speak like that. They do the very thing
they forbid other communities to do. “Thus…relativism cannot proclaim itself,
or even recognize itself, without defeating itself” (p. 43).
11. Alvin Plantinga, “A Defense of Religious Exclusivism,” in The Analytic
Theist, ed. James F. Sennett (Eerdmans, 1998), p. 205.

12. John Hick, The Myth of God Incarnate (Westminster, 1977) and An
Interpretation of Religion (Yale University Press, 1989). For a much more
extensive answer to Hick than I give here see Peter Van Inwagen, “Non Est
Hick,” in The Rationality of Belief and the Plurality of Faith, ed. T. Senor
(Cornell University Press, 1995).

13. A sophisticated presentation of this point is found in Stanley Fish’s “The
Trouble with Tolerance” in the November 10, 2006, issue of the Chronicle of
Higher Education. This is a review of Wendy Brown’s Regulating Aversion:
Tolerance in the Age of Identity and Empire (Princeton University Press, 2006).
Her point (and Fish’s) is that the Western idea of “tolerance for all views” is
itself a very particular set of assumptions about reality that is then used as a
criteria to determine who society will tolerate and who it won’t. Fish says that
our society has its own set of holy, unquestionable beliefs, like “the sanctity of
choice.” Brown and Fish argue that many historic, traditional beliefs have only
become “intolerant” in our society because of the new construction our liberal
Western society puts upon them. “It assumes that people do things not because
of what they believe, but because they are Jews, Muslims, blacks or gays…they
are immune to rational appeal.” Therefore any religion that values its own truth
ahead of tolerance is considered “over-attached” to their culture and incapable of
being rational. “Once a group has rejected tolerance as a guiding principle and
opted instead for the cultural imperatives of the church or tribe, it becomes a
candidate for intolerance that will be performed in the name of tolerance.”

14. C. John Sommerville, The Decline of the Secular University (Oxford
University Press, 2006), p. 63.

15. Mark Lilla, “Getting Religion: My Long-lost Years as a Teenage
Evangelical,” in New York Times Magazine September 18, 2005, p. 95.
16. Robert Audi, “The Separation of Church and State and the Obligations of
Citizenship,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 18 (1989): 296; John Rawls,
Political Liberalism (Columbia University Press, 1993), pp. 212–254.

17. On February 28, 2007, this document could be accessed at
http://www.cfidc.org/declaration.html.

18. Richard Rorty, “Religion as a Conversation-Stopper,” Philosophy and Social
Hope (Penguin, 1999), pp. 168–169.
19. See Richard Rorty, Consequences of Pragmatism (University of Minnesota
Press, 1982) pp. 166–67.
20. Stephen L. Carter, The Dissent of the Governed (Harvard University Press,
1999), p. 90.
21. For example, Linda Hirshman makes a case against women staying out of
the marketplace to raise children at home. She insists that it is wrong for women
to do that even if it is their free, voluntary choice. “The family—with its
repetitious, socially invisible, physical tasks—is a necessary part of life, but it
allows fewer opportunities for full human flourishing than public spheres like the
market or the government. This less-flourishing sphere is not the natural or
moral responsibility only of women…. Women assigning it to themselves is…
unjust.” (“Homeward Bound,” in The American Prospect 16, no. 12 (December
2005). Notice her argument is based on an assessment of “human flourishing”
that could never be empirically proven. It is rooted in views of human dignity
and society that on the surface seem secular but are certainly unproveable,
controversial, and ultimately based on worldview faith-assumptions. David
Brooks takes issue with Hirshman: “[She asserts] that high-paying jobs lead to
more human flourishing than parenthood. Look back over your life. Which
memories do you cherish more, those with your family or those at the office?”
See “The Year of Domesticity,” New York Times, January 1, 2006.
22. Gary Rosen, “Narrowing the Religion Gap?” New York Times Sunday
Magazine, February 18, 2007.
23. This interchange is adapted from C. John Sommerville, “The Exhaustion of
Secularism,” The Chronicle Review (June 9, 2006).
24. Michael J. Perry, Under God? Religious Faith and Liberal Democracy

(Cambridge University Press, 2003), p. 44. Nevertheless, Perry rightly argues
that religiously grounded public discourse in a liberal democracy must be
“deliberative,” not just “dogmatic.” That is, speakers must be willing to be
criticized, to answer criticism, to deliberate and debate and seek to make one’s
case as plausible to the other side as possible.
25. See Perry’s Chapter 3: “Why Political Reliance on Religiously Grounded
Morality Is Not Illegitimate in a Liberal Democracy” in Under God? above.
26. See John Witte, Jr., “God’s Joust, God’s Justice: An Illustration from the
History of Marriage Law,” in Christian Perspectives on Legal Thought, M.
McConnell, R. Cochran, A. Carmella, eds. (Yale University Press, 2001), pp.
406–425.
27. Stanley Fish, “Our Faith in Letting It All Hang Out,” New York Times,
February 12, 2006.
28. Miroslav Volf, “Soft Difference: Theological Reflections on the Relation
Between Church and Culture in 1 Peter,” Ex Auditu 10 (1994): 15–30.
29. See C. S. Lewis’s appendix, “Illustrations of the Tao” in The Abolition of
Man (Macmillan, 1947). Lewis’s point is that there is significant overlap among
the religions with regard to ethics—how we are supposed to live in the world.
The sharp differences between religions come in another area—“soteriology.”
Religions differ in their directions for how to connect to God and get the
spiritual power to live in the prescribed way.

30. This statement may surprise many readers who have heard that older
religions and paganism were more positive toward women than Christianity was.
It was extremely common in the Greco-Roman world to throw out new female
infants to die from exposure, because of the low status of women in society. The
church forbade its members to do so. Greco-Roman society saw no value in an
unmarried woman, and therefore it was illegal for a widow to go more than two
years without remarrying. But Christianity was the first religion to not force
widows to marry. They were supported financially and honored within the
community so that they were not under great pressure to remarry if they didn’t
want to. Pagan widows lost all control of their husband’s estate when they
remarried but the church allowed widows to maintain their husband’s estate.

Finally, Christians did not believe in cohabitation. If a Christian man wanted to
live with a woman he had to marry her, and this gave women far greater security.
Also, the pagan double standard of allowing married men to have extramarital
sex and mistresses was forbidden. In all these ways Christian women enjoyed far
greater security and equality than did women in the surrounding culture. See
Rodney Stark, The Rise of Christianity (Harper, 1996), Chapter 5: “The Role of
Women in Christian Growth.”

31. A great summary of why Christianity triumphed over the older paganism
through its practices of compassion and justice is found in Rodney Stark, The
Rise of Christianity (Harper, 1996), Chapters 4, 6, 7.

TWO—How Could a Good God Allow Suffering?

1. This argument was put in its most classic form by David Hume in Dialogues
Concerning Natural Religion, ed. Richard Popkin (Hackett, 1980). “Epicurus’
old questions are yet unanswered. Is [God] willing to prevent evil but not able?
Then he is impotent. Is he able but not willing? Then he is malevolent. Is he both
able and willing? From whence then is evil?” (p. 63).
2. Ron Rosenbaum, “Disaster Ignites Debate: Was God in the Tsunami?” New
York Observer, January 10, 2005. Of course Mackie was only articulating a very
ancient question, from Epicurus through David Hume. See note 1 above.
3. W. P. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil and the Human Cognitive
Condition,” Philosophical Perspectives 5:30–67. See also The Evidential
Argument from Evil, Daniel Howard-Snyder, ed., (Indiana University Press,
1996) for an extensive survey of the a-theological argument from evil.
4. The summary of Mackie’s argument is based on that of Daniel HowardSnyder in his “God, Evil, and Suffering,” in Reason for the Hope Within, ed. M.
J. Murray (Eerdmans, 1999), p. 84. The Howard-Snyder article is an excellent

summary article in its own right, and shows why there are not currently
confident assertions among philosophers that evil and suffering disprove the
existence of God. Indeed, the book by Mackie (1982) may be the last significant
work to do so.
5. The “no-see-um” argument and related issues to the problem of evil are
treated in Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief (Oxford, 2000), pp. 466–
67. See also Alvin Plantinga, “A Christian Life Partly Lived” in Philosophers
Who Believe, ed. Kelly James Clark (IVP, 1993), p. 72.
6. C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (Macmillan, 1960), p. 31.
7. Alvin Plantinga, “A Christian Life Partly Lived,” Philosophers Who Believe,
ed. Kelly James Clark (IVP, 1993), p. 73.
8. William Lane, The Gospel According to Mark (Eerdmans, 1974), p. 516.
9. Ibid, p. 573.
10. Jonathan Edwards concludes: “The sufferings which Christ endured in his
body on the cross…were yet the least part of his last sufferings…. If it had been
only the sufferings which he endured in his body, though they were very
dreadful, we cannot conceive that the mere anticipation of them would have such
an effect on Christ. Many of the martyrs have endured as severe tortures in their
bodies as Christ did…yet their souls have not been so overwhelmed.” See
“Christ’s Agony,” The Works of Jonathan Edwards, vol. 2, E. Hickman, ed.
(Banner of Truth, 1972).
11. In the history of theology there has been much debate over whether an
infinite, eternal God can actually have “passions” and experience joy and pain
and grief. One side argues the “impassibility” of God and insists all such Biblical
language is merely metaphorical. Others, like Jurgen Moltmann (The Crucified
God) argue strongly for the “passibility” of God. A balanced view of this is
provided by Don Carson, in The Difficult Doctrine of the Love of God (IVP,
2000), pp. 66–73. Carson argues that God does suffer grief and pain, but guards
this position with careful qualifications and balancing assertions.
12. Essais (Gallimard, 1965), p. 444. Translated and quoted by Bruce Ward in
“Prometheus or Cain? Albert Camus’s Account of the Western Quest for
Justice,” Faith and Philosophy (April 1991): 213.

13. J. R. R. Tolkien, “The Field of Cormallen,” The Return of the King (various
editions).
14. This may be the reason George MacDonald can say: “We do not know how
much of the pleasures even of life we owe to the intermingled sorrows. Joy
[alone] cannot unfold the deepest truths, although deepest truth must be the
deepest joy.” Phantastes: A Faerie Romance (Eerdmans, 1981), p. 67.
15. Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Brothers Karamazov, Chapter 34. I think it should
be stated that Dostoevsky does not say it will be possible to justify the evil itself.
Evil may be used by God to bring about even greater good than if it had not
occurred, but it nonetheless remains evil, and therefore inexcusable and
unjustifiable in itself.
16. C. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce (Macmillan, 1946), p. 64.

THREE—Christianity Is a Straitjacket

1. M. Scott Peck, The People of the Lie: The Hope for Healing Human Evil
(Simon and Schuster, 1983), Chapter 4, p. 168. Peck uses Charlene as an
example of the mental un-health that engulfs a person who has nothing in his or
her life more important than the fulfillment of individual needs and wants.
“Mental health requires that the human will submit itself to something higher
than itself. To function decently in this world we must submit ourselves to some
principle that takes precedence over what we want at any given moment.” p.
162.
2. Emma Goldman, “The Failure of Christianity,” first published in 1913, in
Goldman’s Mother Earth journal. Found at
http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/goldman/failureofchristianity.html
accessed on December 26, 2005.
3. This is from the famous “Sweet Mystery of Life” statement in the Supreme
Court’s Planned Parenthood v. Casey ruling: “At the heart of liberty is the right
to define one’s own concept of existence, of meaning of the universe, and the
mystery of human life.” Notice that the statement does not say we are just free to

“discover” truth for ourselves but rather to “define” and create it.
4. From David Friend and the editors of Life, The Meaning of Life: Reflections in
Words and Pictures on Why We Are Here (Little, Brown, 1991), p. 33.
5. From “Truth and Power,” in Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected
Interviews and Other Writing 1972–1977., ed. Colin Gordon (Pantheon, 1980),
p. 131.
6. C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (Collins, 1978), p. 48.
7. Emily Eakin, “The Latest Theory Is That Theory Doesn’t Matter,” New York
Times, April 19, 2003, and “The Theory of Everything, RIP,” New York Times,
October 17, 2004. See also Dinitia Smith, “Cultural Theorists, Start Your
Epitaphs,” New York Times, January 3, 2004.
8. G. K. Chesterton, in Orthodoxy: The Romance of Faith (Doubleday, 1990),
pp. 33, 41–42.
9. For a good summary of the faith-commitments underlying any “liberal
democracy” see Michael J. Perry, Under God?, p. 36. See also Stanley Fish’s
November 10, 2006, Chronicle of Higher Education article, “The Trouble with
Tolerance.”
10. Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, 2nd ed.
(University of Notre Dame Press, 1984), and Whose Justice? Which Rationality?
(University of Notre Dame Press, 1988).
11. On this subject there are many good books. Among them are Stephen L.
Carter, The Dissent of the Governed (Harvard University Press, 1999), p. 90. See
also Alasdair MacIntyre, Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (Duckworth, 1987).
Richard John Neuhaus, The Naked Public Square: Religion and Democracy in
America, 2nd ed. (Eerdmans, 1986), and Wilfred McClay, “Two Kinds of
Secularism,” The Wilson Quarterly (Summer 2000). A sophisticated dialogue on
this subject can be found in R. Audi and N. Wolterstorff, Religion in the Public
Square: The Place of Religious Convictions in Political Debate (Rowman and
Littlefield, 1997). See Chapter 8 for more on the worldview soil that human
rights need in order to grow.
12. Michel Foucault has pointed out that the Western society’s emphasis on

individual rights and “inclusion” of minorities, women, et al is accompanied by a
“shadow narrative” of exclusion. How do we regard those who don’t accept the
Western concepts of individual rights and privacy? Foucault points out that those
who question modernity’s views of rights and reason are stigmatized not as
“immoral” or “heretical” (as in medieval times) but now as “irrational” and
“uncivilized.” For a good summary of Foucault’s critique of so-called Western
“inclusiveness” see Miroslav Volf, Exclusion and Embrace: A Theological
Exploration of Identity, Otherness, and Reconciliation (Abingdon, 1996), pp.
58–64.
13. “Radical indeterminacy…is a correlate of a consistent drive toward inclusion
that levels all boundaries that divide. [But does this]…not undermine from
within the idea of inclusion, however? Without boundaries we will be able to
know only what we are fighting against but not what we are fighting for.
Intelligent struggle against exclusion demands categories and normative criteria
that enable us to distinguish between repressive…practices…and nonrepressive
ones…. “No boundaries” means…neither happiness nor pleasure, neither
freedom nor justice, could be identified.” Volf, Exclusion and Embrace, p. 61.
14. An obvious example was the remark by Jerry Falwell on Pat Robertson’s The
700 Club in the wake of the 9–11 attacks. “I really believe that the pagans, and
the abortionists, and the feminists, and the gays and the lesbians who are actively
trying to make that an alternative lifestyle, the ACLU, People for the American
Way, all of them who have tried to secularize America. I point the finger in their
face and say ‘you helped this happen.’” The widespread outcry and complaints
from within the church forced Falwell to retract his statement within hours. (See
http://archives.cnn.com/2001/US/09/14/Falwell.apology. Last accessed March 5,
2007.)
15. Lamin Sanneh, Whose Religion Is Christianity? (Eerdmans, 2003), p. 15.
16. Philip Jenkins, Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity (Oxford,
2002), p. 56. The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity (Oxford
University Press, 2002), p. 56.
17. Ibid., p. 70.
18. David Aikman, Jesus in Beijing: How Christianity Is Transforming China
and Changing the Global Balance of Power (Regnery, 2003), p. 285.

19. Sanneh attributes this to Christianity’s “translatability.” A Gambian and
former Muslim, he contrasts Christianity with Islam, which insists that the true
Qu’ran cannot really be translated. To truly hear God’s word, you must learn
Arabic. But to privilege one language is to privilege one culture, because the key
words in any language have a meaning rooted in a culture’s traditions and
thought-forms. In contrast to Islam, Christianity (according to the book of Acts)
was born in the miracle of Pentecost in which every hearer heard the gospel in
their own language. So no one language or culture is privileged over any other.
The Bible is translated into every culture and language. See Lamin Sanneh,
“Translatability in Islam and Christianity, with Special Reference to Africa,”
Translating the Message: The Missionary Impact on Culture (Orbis, 1987), p.
211ff.
20. Lamin Sanneh, Whose Religion Is Christianity? (Eerdmans, 2003), p. 43.
21. Ibid., pp. 43–44, 69–70.
22. Sanneh and Andrew F. Walls do not deny that missionaries from one culture
(e.g., European) usually impose their own culture’s form of Christianity on the
new converts. But when converts get to read the Bible in their own language,
they come to see things in the Word that the missionaries “played down” (like
exorcisms) and other things they “played up” in accordance with their own
cultural perspectives and biases. This may lead to a time of over-reaction against
the missionaries’ form of faith. Eventually the converts come to terms with their
own cultures and traditions—rejecting parts of it, affirming parts of it, and
modifying parts of it all in light of their reading of the Scriptures.
23. From R. Niebuhr, “Humour and Faith,” The Essential Reinhold Niebuhr, R.
M. Brown, ed. (Yale University Press, 1986), p. 49ff. Quoted in Sommerville,
The Decline of the Secular University, p. 129.
24. Andrew F. Walls, “The Expansion of Christianity: An Interview with
Andrew Walls,” Christian Century, August 2–9, 2000, p. 792.
25. “Christianity is the religion of over two thousand different language groups
in the world. More people pray and worship in more languages than in any other
religion in the world…. Obviously these facts of cultural and linguistic
pioneering conflict with the reputation of Christianity as one colossal act of
cultural intolerance. This has produced a deep Christendom guilt complex,

against which all evidence seems unavailing. It is important, however, to get
people to budge, because the default Christianity they now practice is a worn-out
cultural fragment of something much greater and fresher.” Sanneh, Whose
Religion Is Christianity?, pp. 69–70.
26. This term comes from A. J. Conyers, “Can Postmodernism Be Used as a
Template for Christian Theology?” Christian Scholar’s Review 33 (Spring
2004): 3.
27. Kevin Vanhoozer, “Pilgrim’s Digress: Christian Thinking on and About the
Post/Modern Way,” in Christianity and the Postmodern Turn, ed. Myron B.
Penner (Brazos, 2005), p. 74.
28. Quoted in John Stott, The Contemporary Christian (IVP, 1992). The
interview’s English translation appeared in the Guardian Weekly, June 23, 1985.
29. C. S. Lewis, The Four Loves (Harcourt, 1960), p. 123.
30. The unnamed “old author” is quoted in C. S. Lewis, The Four Loves
(Harcourt, 1988), p. 140.

FOUR—The Church Is Responsible for So Much Injustice

1. Mark Lilla, “Getting Religion: My Long-lost Years as a Teenage Evangelical,”
in the New York Times Magazine, September 18, 2005, p. 94–95.
2. “If what you want is an argument against Christianity…you can easily find
some stupid and unsatisfactory Christian and say…‘So there’s your boasted new
man! Give me the old kind.’ But if once you have begun to see that Christianity
is on other grounds probable, you will know in your heart that this is only
evading the issue. What can you ever really know of other people’s souls—of
their temptations, their opportunities, their struggles? One soul in the whole
creation you do know: and it is the only one whose fate is placed in your hands.
If there is a God, you are, in a sense, alone with Him. You cannot put Him off
with speculations about your next-door neighbors or memories of what you have
read in books. What will all that chatter and hearsay count when the anesthetic

fog we call ‘nature’ or ‘the real world’ fades away and the Divine Presence in
which you have always stood becomes palpable, immediate, and unavoidable?”
C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (Macmillan, 1965), p. 168.
3. Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything
(Hachette, 2007), pp. 35–36.
4. Some secular thinkers today insist that every religion has the seeds for
oppression within it. This view, however, fails to take into consideration the
enormous differences between religious faiths in their views of conversion.
Buddhism and Christianity, for example, require a profound inner transformation
based on personal decision. Coerced compliance with external rules is seen as
spiritually deadly. These faiths, then, are much more likely to seek a society that
values religious freedom, so that individuals can learn the truth and give
themselves to it freely. Max Weber and others have demonstrated that Christian
doctrine, particularly in its Protestant form, provides a basis for individual rights
and freedom that is conducive for the growth of both democracy and capitalism.
Other philosophies and faiths put much less value on individual freedom of
choice. The difference between Christianity and Islam on the meaning of
conversion is a case in point. Christian conversion involves coming from only
“knowing about” God to “knowing God” personally. Most Muslims would
consider it presumptuous to speak of knowing God intimately and personally. A
child growing up in a Christian home may nonetheless speak of his or her
conversion at age ten or fifteen or twenty. A child growing up in a Muslim home
would never speak of being converted to Islam. This difference in understanding
means that Christians see little value in putting social pressure on people to
convert or to maintain their Christian profession. Islam, however, sees no
problem with applying legal and social pressure to keep citizens aligned with
Muslim commitments. (Thanks to Don Carson for this insight.)
5. Alister McGrath, The Dawkins Delusion? Atheist Fundamentalism and the
Denial of the Divine (Inter-Varsity Press, 2007), p. 81.
6. Merold Westphal, Suspicion and Faith: The Religious Uses of Modern
Atheism (Eerdmans, 1993), Chapters 32–34. See page 203: “I would like to…
accuse Marx of plagiarism. His critique of capitalism is, in essence, the biblical
concern for widows and orphans, stripped of its theological foundation and
applied to the conditions of modernity.”

7. Westphal, Suspicion and Faith, p. 205.
8. See Proverbs 14:31; 19:17; Matthew 25:31–46. Calvin’s remark is from his
commentary on Habbakuk 2:6 and is quoted in Westphal, Suspicion and Faith, p.
200.
9. C. John Sommerville, The Decline of the Secular University (Oxford
University Press, 2006), p. 63.
10. Ibid., pp. 69–70.
11. Ibid., p. 70.
12. Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations,
Science, Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery (Princeton University Press, 2004),
p. 291. See pp. 338–53 for an overview of abolition movements.
13. See Deuteronomy 24:7 and 1 Timothy 1:9–11, which forbid kidnapping.
Many people (both inside the Christian church and outside) assume that the
Bible supports slavery. For more on this see Chapter 6.
14. See Mark Noll’s The Civil War as a Theological Crisis (University of North
Carolina Press, 2006) for an extensive discussion of how Christians debated
slavery through different interpretations of the Scripture. Noll’s book
demonstrates how some church leaders used texts in the Bible regarding slavery
to justify the slave trade. But they were blind to the stark differences between
African chattel slavery and the bond-service and indentured servanthood treated
in the Bible.
15. Stark, For the Glory of God (Princeton, 2004), pp. 350ff.
16. David L. Chappell, A Stone of Hope: Prophetic Religion and the Death of
Jim Crow (University of North Carolina Press, 2003).
17. A narrative of the Catholic church’s resistance to Communism in the 1970s
and 1980s is given in Chapter 17 in “Between Two Crosses,” in Charles Colson
and Ellen Vaughn, The Body (Thomas Nelson, 2003).
18. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers from Prison: Enlarged Edition,
Eberhard Bethge, ed. (Macmillan, 1971), p. 418.

FIVE—How Can a Loving God Send People to Hell?

1. May 23, 2005, Pew Forum’s biannual Faith Angle conference on religion,
politics, and public life in Key West, Florida. As of September 5, 2005, the
transcript was found at http://pewforum.org/events/index.php?Event ID=80.
2. Robert Bellah, et al., Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in
American Life, 1st ed., (University of California Press, 1985), p. 228.
3. From C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (Collins, 1978), p. 46. On this subject
see also Lewis, English Literature in the Sixteenth Century, Excluding Drama in
the Oxford History of English Literature series (Oxford University Press, 1953),
pp. 13–14.
4. Lewis, Abolition of Man, p. 46.
5. Alan Jacobs, in his biography of Lewis, notes that he took pains to insist that
he had no quarrel with the scientific method per se. That method actually
assumes the uniformity of nature, and many scholars have pointed out that it was
the Christian worldview that provided this. But Lewis is pointing out that
modern science was born with “dreams of power.” See Jacobs, The Narnian: The
Life and Imagination of C. S. Lewis (Harper San Francisco, 2005), pp. 184–187.
6. Rebecca Pippert, Hope Has Its Reasons (Harper, 1990), Chapter 4, “What
Kind of God Gets Angry?”
7. Miroslav Volf, Exclusion and Embrace: A Theological Exploration of Identity,
Otherness, and Reconciliation (Abingdon, 1996), pp. 303–304.
8. Volf, Exclusion and Embrace, p. 303.
9. Czeslaw Milosz, “The Discreet Charm of Nihilism,” New York Review of
Books, November 19, 1998.
10. All descriptions and depictions of heaven and hell in the Bible are symbolic
and metaphorical. Each metaphor suggests one aspect of the experience of hell.
(For example, “fire” tells us of the disintegration, while “darkness” tells us of the

isolation.) Having said that does not at all imply that heaven or hell themselves
are “metaphors.” They are very much realities. Jesus ascended (with his physical
body, mind you) into heaven. The Bible clearly proposes that heaven and hell are
actual realities, but also indicates that all language about them is allusive,
metaphorical, and partial.
11. For more on the likeness of sin to addiction, see Cornelius Plantinga, Not the
Way It’s Supposed to Be: A Breviary of Sin (Eerdmans, 1995), Chapter 8, “The
Tragedy of Addiction.”
12. This is a compilation of quotes from three Lewis sources: Mere Christianity
(Macmillan, 1964), p. 59; The Great Divorce (Macmillan, 1963), pp. 71–72;
“The Trouble with X,” in God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics
(Eerdmans, 1970), p. 155.
13. From C. S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain (Macmillan, 1961), p. 116; The
Great Divorce (Macmillan, 1963), p. 69.

SIX—Science Has Disproved Christianity

1. Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker (W. W. Norton, 1986), p. 6.
2. Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006), p.
100.
3. Van Harvey, for example, says that defenses of miraculous events can never
be taken seriously by the critical historian, because such thinking violates “what
we now call the common-sense view of the world.” Van Harvey, The Historian
and Believer (Macmillan, 1966), p. 68. See also his essay, “New Testament
Scholarship and Christian Belief” in Jesus in History and Myth, R. Joseph
Hoffman and Gerald A. Larue, eds. (Prometheus, 1986).
4. John Macquarrie, Principles of Christian Theology (Scribner, 1977), p. 248,
quoted in Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief, p. 394.
5. Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief, p. 406. Plantinga cites an important

article by the philosopher William Alston, who argues that one can perfectly
well do science even if one thinks God has done and even sometimes still does
miracles. See “Divine Action Ahadow or Substance?” in The God Who Acts:
Philosophical and Theological Explorations, Thomas F. Tracy, ed.
(Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994), pp. 49–50.
6. See John Paul II’s Message to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, October
22, 1996, “Magisterium Is Concerned with the Question of Evolution for It
Involves Conception of Man.”
7. Francis Collins, The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for
Belief (Free Press, 2006). Another example of a leading scientist who believes in
a God-designed universe yet rejects both Intelligent Design and evolution as
materialist philosophy is Harvard astronomer Owen Gingerich, who wrote God’s
Universe (Belknap Press, 2006).
8. Ian Barbour, When Science Meets Religion: Enemies, Strangers, or Partners?
(Harper, 2000). Barbour argues that while Christians use all of these models,
what he calls “integration” is the best. See Chapter 4 on “Evolution and
Continuing Creation.”
9. Christian Smith, ed., The Secular Revolution: Power, Interests, and Conflict in
the Secularization of American Public Life (University of California Press,
2003).
10. Ibid., pp. 1–12. See also Alister McGrath’s chapter, “Warfare: The Natural
Sciences and the Advancement of Atheism,” The Twilight of Atheism (Oxford
University Press, 2002), and Rodney Stark’s chapter “God’s Handiwork: The
Religious Origins of Science,” in For the Glory of God (Princeton University
Press, 2004).
11. Edward Larson and Larry Witham, “Scientists Are Still Keeping the Faith,”
Nature (April 3, 1997). See also Stark, To the Glory of God, pp. 192–97.
12. Edward Larson and Larry Witham, “Leading Scientists Still Reject God,”
Nature 394, no. 6691 (1998): 313.
13. Alister McGrath, The Dawkins Delusion?, p. 44.
14. From Stephen Jay Gould, “Impeaching a Self-Appointed Judge,” Scientific

American 267, no. 1 (1992). Quoted in Alister McGrath, The Dawkins Delusion?
(Inter-Varsity, 2007), p. 34.
15. Thomas Nagel, “The Fear of Religion,” The New Republic (October 23,
2006).
16. Stark, For the Glory of God, pp. 192–97.
17. See Gordon Wenham, Genesis 1–15 (Word, 1987).
18. Despite widespread impressions to the contrary, both inside and outside of
the church, modern Creation Science was not the traditional response of
conservative and evangelical Protestants in the nineteenth century when
Darwin’s theory first became known. There was widespread acceptance of the
fact that Genesis 1 may have been speaking of long ages rather than literal days.
R. A. Torrey, the fundamentalist editor of The Fundamentals (published from
1910–1915, which gave definition to the term “fundamentalist”), said that it was
possible “to believe thoroughly in the infallibility of the Bible and still be an
evolutionist of a certain type” (quoted in Mark Noll, Evangelical American
Christianity: An Introduction [Blackwells, 2001], p. 171). The man who defined
the doctrine of Biblical inerrancy, B. B. Warfield of Princeton (d. 1921) believed
that God may have used something like evolution to bring about life-forms. The
best account of the rise of modern Creation Science is by Ronald L. Numbers,
The Creationists: the Evolution of Scientific Creationism (Knopf, 1992). See also
Mark Noll, The Scandal of the Evangelical Mind (Eerdmans, 1994), “Thinking
About Science,” and Mark Noll and David Livingstone, B. B. Warfield on
Evolution, Scripture, and Science (Baker, 2000).
19. David Atkinson, The Message of Genesis 1–11 (IVP, 1990), p. 31.

SEVEN—You Can’t Take the Bible Literally

1. Quoted in a review of Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt by George Sim Johnston
in The Wall Street Journal, November 12–13, 2005.
2. For example, the famous argument for the divinity of Christ—“Liar, Lunatic,

or Lord?”—does not work unless it can be shown that Jesus really claimed to be
divine. C. S. Lewis put this argument in its classic form: “A man who was
merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would not be a great moral
teacher. He would either be a lunatic—on the level with a man who says he is a
poached egg—or he would be the devil of hell. You must take your choice.
Either this was, and is, the Son of God, or else a madman or something worse.
You can shut Him up for a fool or you can fall at His feet and call Him Lord and
God. But let us not come with any patronizing nonsense about His being a great
human teacher. He has not left that open to us.” (Mere Christianity, Book 2,
Chapter 3.) The problem with this argument is that it assumes that the Biblical
accounts of Jesus’s words are accurate. That requires the establishment that the
Bible is historically reliable, at least in general. A better statement of the
argument would be: Jesus is either “Liar, Lunatic, Legend, or Lord.” Until you
show that the picture of Christ in the Bible is not totally legendary, the famous
argument is not effective.
3. The Jesus Seminar uses the “double dissimilarity criteria” as a way of
evaluating the historical validity of a Biblical text. That is, they claim that we
can only be sure a passage in the gospel is historically genuine if its teaching
could not possibly have come either from first-century Judaism or from the early
church. It must, therefore, contradict what we know about the dominant beliefs
of first-century Judaism or Christianity. (Otherwise we can’t be sure that that
passage wasn’t created to support the dominant belief.) But this criteria assumes
that Jesus could not have been affected by his Jewish heritage and that he could
have left no mark on his followers. Because of the unlikeliness of this, more and
more Biblical scholars are sharply criticizing the work of the Jesus Seminar as
unnecessarily negative and biased against the gospels.
4. I am not here trying to argue for the complete trustworthiness of the Bible,
only that its portrayal of the life and teaching of Jesus is historically accurate. If
it is, then we can draw conclusions about who Jesus is from the information we
read there. If eventually we put our faith in Jesus, then his view of the Bible will
become ours. Speaking personally, I take the whole Bible to be reliable not
because I can somehow “prove” it all to be factual. I accept it because I believe
in Jesus and that was his view of the Bible.
5. A scholarly but readable response to the The Da Vinci Code is Ben
Witherington, The Gospel Code (IVP, 2004). Witherington’s refutation of the
historical assumptions behind The Da Vinci Code is devastating.

6. There is a large and growing body of top-flight scholarship that argues for the
historical reliability of the gospels. For a more detailed case than we can
possibly conduct here, consult the following important books: Richard
Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses (Eerdmans, 2006), N. T. Wright, Jesus
and the Victory of God (Fortress, 1998) and The Resurrection of the Son of God
(Fortress, 2003), C. Blomberg, The Historical Reliability of the Gospels (IVP,
1987), and The Historical Reliability of John’s Gospel (IVP, 2002), as well as the
more popular and older F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They
Reliable? (Eerdmans, reissued 2003 with a foreword by N. T. Wright). Much of
the most skeptical criticism of the Bible purports to be based in rigorous
historical research, but it is heavily influenced by philosophical presuppositions
(i.e., alternate beliefs). For an analysis of these philosophical underpinnings, see
C. Stephen Evans, The Historical Christ and the Jesus of Faith (Oxford
University Press, 1996), and Alvin Plantinga, “Two (or More) Kinds of Scripture
Scholarship,” Warranted Christian Belief (Oxford University Press, 2002).
7. Virtually all historians agree on this today. In the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries, scholars in Europe were deeply influenced by the
rationalism of the Enlightenment and therefore came to the Biblical texts with
the premise that the miraculous elements in the gospels must have been added
much later to original “factual” accounts. Since they knew that legendary
accounts of historical events had to be formulated a long time after the events,
they posited that the gospels were written at least a hundred years or more after
Jesus’s death. But over the last century manuscript evidence has forced even the
most critical scholars to conclude that they were all written much sooner. For an
accessible account of how to date the various New Testament documents
(including the gospels) see F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They
Reliable?, with a new foreword by the prominent scholar N. T. Wright. Also see
Paul Barnett, The New Testament. Most would say Mark was written in the
seventies, Matthew and Luke in the eighties, and John in the nineties. This
makes sense, in that they would have been written down at the time that the
apostles and other eyewitnesses were beginning to die, but at a time in which
many were still available to be consulted. (See the claim of Luke in Luke 1:1-4.)
8. Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, Chapters 2, 3, and 6.
Furthermore, in Chapter 4, Bauckham does an exhaustive analysis of the names
of the figures in the gospel stories. He concludes that they reflect the types of
names of Jews in Palestine before the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D., and not
the sharply different kinds of proper names Jews had in the diaspora after 70 A.D.

The conclusion is that it is highly unlikely that the gospel stories originated in
later Christian communities outside of Palestine.
9. N. T. Wright, Simply Christian (Harper, 2006), p. 97.
10. Gopnik adds: “There are no new beliefs, no new arguments, and certainly no
new evidence in the papyrus that would cause anyone to doubt who did not
doubt before.” He is talking about the Gnostic text The Gospel of Judas. See
“Jesus Laughed,” The New Yorker, April 17, 2006.
11. For more on the formation of the New Testament canon, see Bruce M.
Metzger, The Canon of the New Testament: Its Origin, Development, and
Significance (Oxford University Press, 1987). For a briefer survey see David G.
Dunbar, “The Biblical Canon,” in Hermeneutic, Authority, and Canon, D.
Carson and J. Woodbridge, eds. (Zondervan, 1986).
12. C. John Sommerville, The Decline of the Secular University, pp. 105–106.
13. We will pay more attention to this feature of the gospel narratives in Chapter
12.
14. Bauckham, Eyewitnesses, pp. 170–78.
15. Wright, Simply Christian, p. 97.
16. C. S. Lewis, Christian Reflections, Walter Hooper, ed. (Eerdmans, 1967), p.
155.
17. Bauckham, Eyewitnesses, pp. 324–346.
18. Ibid., p. 273.
19. David Van Biema, “Rewriting the Gospels,” Time, March 7, 2007.
20. Vincent Taylor, The Formation of the Gospel Tradition 2nd ed. (Macmillan,
1935), p. 41. Also quoted and commented on in Bauckham, p. 7.
21. In his book Bauckham calls for New Testament scholarship to make a clean
break with the older, very skeptical approach to the Bible called “form criticism”
and connected especially to Rudolph Bultmann. Whether this is going to happen

soon or not is a matter of opinion. But books by the likes of Bauckham and
Wright are opening the door for many younger scholars who are more open to
the evidence that the Bible can be trusted. For an interesting account of the
historical origins of skeptical Biblical criticism, see Hans Frei, The Eclipse of
Biblical Narrative (Yale University Press, 1974). For an introduction on how
recent scholarship has grown much less skeptical about the gospels’ historicity
than the older scholarship, see Craig Blomberg, “Where Do We Start Studying
Jesus?” in Jesus Under Fire: Modern Scholarship Reinvents the Historical
Jesus, M. J. Wilkins and J. P. Moreland, eds. (Zondervan, 1995). The best onevolume account of recent Jesus scholarship is B. Witherington, The Jesus Quest,
2nd ed. (IVP, 1997). An interesting example of how much more respectful of the
Bible scholarship is getting is John P. Meier, the author of the massive trilogy A
Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus. He is a moderate, middle-of-theroad scholar who rejects some Biblical texts as historically dubious. Yet he
makes a rather devastating critique of the older skepticism and shows that all the
basic lines of the traditional view of Jesus’s words and deeds can be believed on
the basis of thorough historical research.
22. See Murray J. Harris, Slave of Christ: A New Testament Metaphor for Total
Devotion to Christ (IVP, 1999), pp. 44, 70. Also see Andrew Lincoln, Ephesians,
Word Bible Commentary, 1990, pp. 416–17: “Modern readers [of the Bible]
need to free themselves from a number of assumptions about first-century
slavery, including the assumptions that there was a wide separation between the
status of slave and freedperson…and that all who were enslaved were trying to
free themselves from this bondage…. There was a broad continuum of statuses
between slave and free in both Roman and Greek society. Slaves of Greek
owners could own property, including their own slaves, and could obtain
permission to take other employment in addition to their duties as slaves…. It
was frequently in the owner’s interest to manumit them, since their labor could
be obtained more cheaply if they were freedpersons…. Though there were
undoubtedly far too many cases of cruelty, brutality, and injustice, there was no
general climate of unrest among slaves.
23. “Although it has been fashionable to deny it, antislavery doctrines began to
appear in Christian theology soon after the decline of Rome and were
accompanied by the eventual disappearance of slavery in all but the fringes of
Christian Europe. When Europeans subsequently instituted slavery in the New
World, they did so over strenuous papal opposition, a fact that was conveniently
“lost” from history until recently. Finally, the abolition of New World slavery

was initiated and achieved by Christian activists…. Slavery was once nearly
universal to all societies able to afford it, and only in the West did significant
moral opposition ever arise and lead to abolition” (Rodney Stark, For the Glory
of God, Princeton University Press, 2004, p. 291).

Intermission
1. Dawkins, The God Delusion, p. 31ff.
2. For a nontechnical introduction to the difference between strong and critical
rationalism, see Victor Reppert, C. S. Lewis’s Dangerous Idea (Inter-Varsity,
2003), pp. 30–44.
3. W. K. Clifford’s famous essay on this subject was “The Ethics of Belief,” in
which he said: “It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe
anything upon insufficient [empirical] evidence.” A. J. Ayer’s most well-known
text was Language, Truth, and Logic.
4. See Reppert for examples.
5. Alasdair MacIntyre’s Whose Justice, Which Rationality? (Notre Dame
University Press, 1988) provocatively and convincingly shows how there are
several different “traditions” of rationality in the West alone—the Aristotelian,
the Augustinian/Thomistic, Common Sense realism. Each of them has logic and
reason operating within different fundamental assumptions about things like
human nature, the relationship of reason to emotion and will, the relationship of
the individual to social context and tradition, and so on. A “rational” argument is
defined as consistency within the whole set of beliefs of a particular tradition.
There may be plenty of overlap between these rationalities, and some arguments
could be considered convincing in more than one of these traditions. But it is
doubtful (to MacIntyre, impossible) that there is any one argument about the
being of God that would be completely convincing to every one in every rational
tradition.
6. One of the best critiques of the Enlightenment view of strong rationalism is
Faith and Rationality: On Reason and Belief in God., A. Plantinga and N.

Wolterstorff, eds. (Notre Dame University Press, 1983). The Enlightenment view
has been called classic or Cartesian “foundationalism,” and that approach has
been almost universally abandoned among philosophers. See also Nicholas
Wolterstorff, Reason Within the Bounds of Religion (Eerdmans, 1984).
7. Thomas Nagel, The Last Word (Oxford University Press: 1997), p. 130.
8. Terry Eagleton, “Lunging, Flailing, Mispunching”: A Review of Richard
Dawkins’s The God Delusions in London Review of Books, vol. 28, no. 20,
October 19, 2006.
9. For a sophisticated case, see H. Siegel, Relativism Refuted: A Critique of
Contemporary Epistemological Relativism (D. Reidel, 1987). Relativists insist
that “truth” is only true within one’s own framework of beliefs, and that each
framework is of equal validity with all the others. Relativists say there is no
framework-transcending criterion by which to adjudicate between all the truthclaims. But as Siegel points out, the relativists’ claim that all frameworks (not
just their own) are equal is itself a framework-transcendent criterion of truth.
With such a claim they move out of their own framework and evaluate others
with their own—which is the very thing they deny to others. “Thus…relativism
cannot proclaim itself, or even recognize itself, without defeating itself” (p. 43).
10. A readable treatment of critical rationalism is in Reppert, C. S. Lewis’s
Dangerous Idea, p. 36ff.
11. From A Devil’s Chaplain (Weidenfield and Nicolson, 2003), p. 81. Quoted in
A. McGrath, The Dawkins Delusion (Inter-Varsity, 2007), p. 100 n16.
12. “The basic structure of my argument is this. Scientists, historians, and
detectives observe data and proceed thence to some theory about what best
explains the occurrence of these data. We can analyze the criteria which they use
in reaching a conclusion that a certain theory is better supported by the data than
a different theory…. Using those same criteria, we find that the view that there is
a God explains everything we observe, not just some narrow range of data.”
Richard Swinburne, Is There a God? (Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 2.
13. C. S. Lewis, “Is Theology Poetry?” The Weight of Glory and Other
Addresses (HarperCollins, 1980), p. 140.

EIGHT—The Clues of God

1. A survey can be found in Alvin Plantinga’s lecture notes, “Two Dozen (or so)
Theistic Arguments,” available at
http://www.homestead.com/philofreligion/files/Theisticarguments.html and
many other places on the Internet. See also the summary of William C. Davis,
“Theistic Arguments,” in Murray, Reason for the Hope Within.
2. Stephen Hawking and Robert Penrose, The Nature of Time and Space
(Princeton University Press, 1996), p. 20.
3. In an interview on Salon.com,
http://www.salon.com/books/int/2006/08/07/collins/index2.html, last accessed
on March 9, 2007.
4. Found at
http://www.truthdig.com/report/page2/20060815_sam_harris_language_ignorance/,
last accessed on March 9, 2007.
5. For a short summary of this argument see Robin Collins, “A Scientific
Argument for the Existence of God: The Fine-Tuning Design Argument,”
Reason for the Hope Within, Michael J. Murray, ed. (Eerdmans, 1999).
6. In an interview on Salon.com,
http://www.salon.com/books/int/2006/08/07/collins/index2.html, last accessed
March 9, 2007.
7. Quoted in Francis Collins, The Language of God: A Scientist Presents
Evidence for Belief (Free Press, 2006), p. 75.
8. See Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (Houghton Mifflin, 2006), p. 107.
9. From Alvin Plantinga, “Dennett’s Dangerous Idea,” in Books and Culture
(May–June 1996): 35.
10. Recounted in Collins, “A Scientific Argument,” p. 77.
11. See “Science Gets Strange” in C. John Sommerville, The Decline of the

Secular University (Oxford University Press, 2006). See also Diogenes Allen,
Christian Belief in a Post-Modern World (John Knox, 1989).
12. Arthur Danto, “Pas de Deux, en Masse: Shirin Neshat’s Rapture,” The
Nation, June 28, 1999.
13. From Leonard Bernstein’s “The Joy of Music” (Simon and Schuster, 2004),
p. 105.
14. Quoted by Robin Marantz Henig in her article “Why Do We Believe?” in
The New York Times Magazine, March 4, 2007, p. 58.
15. The classic statement of this argument is found in the chapter on “Hope” in
C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (Macmillan).
16. N. T. Wright points out that the Christian view of beauty is not the same as
the Platonic. Plato and the Greek philosophers believed that all earthly
experiences of beauty point us away from this material, shadow world into the
eternal spiritual world of ultimate reality. But the Biblical vision of salvation is
for a new heaven and new Earth. Our unfulfilled longings are not just for a
spiritual, eternal world, but for this world, put right and made perfect (see
Wright, Simply Christian, pp. 44–45). This is an important point, because C. S.
Lewis’s famous “argument from desire” in his Mere Christianity follows the
Platonic model a bit too closely.
17. Quoted in Leon Wieseltier, “The God Genome,” New York Times Book
Review, February 19, 2006.
18. The New York Times Magazine, March 4, 2007.
19. Henig, “Why Do We Believe?” p. 43.
20. Ibid., p. 58.
21. Dawkins, The God Delusions, p. 367ff, “Our brains themselves are evolved
organs…evolved to help us survive.”
22. Henig, p. 7.
23. In his foreword to Richard Dawkins’s The Selfish Gene, Robert Trivers noted

Dawkins’s emphasis on the role of deception in animal life, and added if indeed
“deceit is fundamental to animal communication, then there must be strong
selection to spot deception and this ought, in turn, to select for a degree of selfdeception, rendering some facts and motives unconscious so as not to betray—
by the subtle signs of self-knowledge—the deception being practiced.”
Therefore, “the conventional view that natural selection favors nervous systems
which produce ever more accurate images of the world must be a very naïve
view of mental evolution.” Quote from Robert Wright, The Moral Animal
(Pantheon, 1994), pp. 263–64. Cognitive psychologist Justin Barrett writes:
“Some cognitive scientists assume that because our brains and their functions
have been “designed” by natural selection we can trust them to tell us the truth;
such an assumption is epistemologically dubious. Just because we can
successfully survive and reproduce in no way ensures that our minds as a whole
tell us the truth about anything—especially when it comes to sophisticated
thinking…what a completely naturalistic view of the human mind may safely
embrace is that our minds were good for survival in the past.” Justin L. Barrett,
Why Would Anyone Believe in God? (Alta Mira Press, 2004), p. 19.
24. Patricia S. Churchland, “Epistemology in the Age of Neuroscience,” Journal
of Philosophy (October 1987), p. 548. Quoted in Plantinga, Warrant and Proper
Function (Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 218.
25. Nagel, The Last Word, pp. 134–35.
26. Quoted in Alvin Plantinga, “Is Naturalism Irrational?” in Warrant and
Proper Function (Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 219.
27. For the full argument, see A. Plantinga, Chapters 11 and 12 in Warrant and
Proper Function (Oxford University Press, 2000).
28. From Alvin Plantinga’s review of Richard Dawkins’s The God Confusion in
Books and Culture (March/April 2007): 24.
29. Wieseltier’s review, “The God Genome,” appeared in the New York Times,
February 19, 2006.
30. C. S. Lewis, “On Living in an Atomic Age,” in Present Concerns (Collins,
1986), p. 76.

NINE—The Knowledge of God

1. Quoted in Michael J. Perry, Toward a Theory of Human Rights: Religion, Law,
Courts (Cambridge University Press, 2007), p. 28.
2. Christian Smith, Moral Believing Animals: Human Personhood and Culture
(Oxford University Press, 2003), p. 8.
3. Works that try to explain our sense of moral obligation as a product of natural
selection include Edward O. Wilson, On Human Nature (Harvard University
Press, 1978) and “The Biological Basis for Morality” in Atlantic Monthly, April
1998; Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (Oxford University Press, 1976) and
Robert Wright, The Moral Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life
(Pantheon, 1994). For some fairly scathing critiques of this approach see Philip
Kitcher, Vaulting Ambition: Sociobiology and the Quest for Human Nature (MIT
Press, 1985); Hilary Rose and Steven Rose, Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments
Against Evolutionary Psychology (Harmony, 2000); John Dupre, Human Nature
and the Limits of Science (Oxford University Press, 2001).
4. Francis Collins, The Language of God, p. 28, where he debunks a sometimesused example of the sterile worker ant who sacrificially toils to create an
environment for mother ants to have more of their siblings. “But ‘ant altruism’ is
readily explained in evolutionary terms by the fact that the genes motivating the
sterile worker ants are exactly the same ones that will be passed on by their
mother to the siblings they are helping to create. That unusually direct DNA
connection does not apply to more complex populations, where evolutionists
almost universally agree that selection operates on the individual, not the
population.” See also George Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection,
reprint ed., (Princeton University Press, 1996), who argues that group selection
does not occur.
5. “If (as we are supposing) Nature…is the only thing in the universe, then…We
never think a thought because it is true, only because blind Nature forces us to
think it. We never do an act because it is right, only because Nature forces us to
do it…. [But] really, this…conclusion is unbelievable. For one thing, it is only
through trusting our own minds that we have come to know Nature herself…
then the sciences themselves would be chance arrangements of atoms and we

should have no reason for believing in them…they are only the way in which
anthropoids of our species feel when the atoms under our own skulls get in
certain states—those states being produced by causes quite irrational, unhuman,
non-moral…. There is only one way to avoid this deadlock. We must go back to
a much earlier view. We must accept that we are free spirits, free and rational
beings, at present happening an irrational universe, and must draw the
conclusion that we are not derived from it.” (C. S. Lewis, “On Living in an
Atomic Age” in Present Concerns).
6. “Cultural Relativism and Universal Human Rights” by Carolyn FleuhrLobban, The Chronicle of Higher Education, June 9, 1995. This article was cited
and used to make a similar argument in George M. Marsden’s The Outrageous
Idea of Christian Scholarship (Oxford University Press, 1997), p. 86.
7. Quoted in Michael J. Perry, Toward a Theory of Human Rights: Religion, Law,
Courts (Cambridge University Press, 2007), p. 3.
8. Ibid., p. 6.
9. Chapter 1 of Alan M. Dershowitz, Shouting Fire: Civil Liberties in a
Turbulent Age (Little, Brown, 2002).
10. Ibid., p. 15.
11. Quoted in Perry, p. 20.
12. Perry, p. 21.
13. See Sartre’s famous essay “Existentialism Is a Humanism.” “God does not
exist, and…it is necessary to draw the consequences of his absence right to the
end…. There can no longer be any good a priori, since there is no infinite and
perfect consciousness to think it. It is nowhere written that ‘the good’ exists, that
one must be honest or must not lie, since we are now upon the plane where there
are only men. Dostoevsky once wrote: ‘If God did not exist, everything would
be permitted’…. Everything is indeed permitted if God does not exist, and man
is in consequence forlorn, for he cannot find anything to depend upon either
within or outside himself.” This essay can be found in Existentialism from
Dostoyevsky to Sartre, ed. Walter Kaufman (Meridian, 1989). It can be found
online at http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/sartre/works/exist/sartre.htm
as of March 17, 2007.

14. Perry, Toward a Theory of Human Rights, p. xi.
15. Ibid., p. 23. Another recent book on this subject is E. Bucar and B. Barnett,
eds., Does Human Rights Need God? (Eerdmans, 2005).
16. Arthur Allen Leff, “Unspeakable Ethics, Unnatural Law,” Duke Law Journal
(December 1979).
17. F. Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, part IV, “On the Higher Man,” near
the end of section I.
18. Raimond Gaita, A Common Humanity: Thinking About Love and Truth and
Justice. (Quoted in Michael J. Perry, Toward a Theory of Human Rights, pp. 7
and 17–18.)
19. From Chapter 10, “Fecundity,” in Annie Dillard, Pilgrim at Tinker Creek
(HarperCollins, 1974).
20. Quoted in Peter C. Moore, One Lord, One Faith (Thomas Nelson, 1994), p.
128.
21. C. S. Lewis, “On Living in an Atomic Age” (1948), reprinted in the volume
Present Concerns, pp. 73–80.

TEN—The Problem of Sin

1. Barbara B. Taylor, Speaking of Sin: The Lost Language of Salvation (Cowley,
2000), pp. 57–67.
2. Andrew Delbanco, The Real American Dream: A Meditation on Hope
(Harvard University Press, 2000), p. 25
3. Soren Kierkegaard, The Sickness Unto Death: A Christian Psychological
Exposition for Edification and Awakening (Penguin, 1989), pp. 111, 113.
4. Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death (Free Press, 1973), pp. 3, 7.

5. Ibid., p. 160.
6. Ibid., p. 109.
7. Ibid., p. 166. It is important to note that Becker was not trying to promote
faith. He was an atheist, so that was not his agenda.
8. If we use Kierkegaard’s definition we can categorize various “god-substitutes”
and the particular kinds of brokenness and damage that each one brings into a
life. So we could discern some of the following:
•If you center your life and identity on your spouse or partner, you will be
emotionally dependent, jealous, and controlling. The other person’s
problems will be overwhelming to you.
•If you center your life and identity on your family and children, you will
try to live your life through your children until they resent you or have no
self of their own. At worst, you may abuse them when they displease you.
•If you center your life and identity on your work and career, you will be a
driven workaholic and a boring, shallow person. At worst you will lose
family and friends and, if your career goes poorly, develop deep
depression.
•If you center your life and identity on money and possessions, you’ll be
eaten up by worry or jealousy about money. You’ll be willing to do
unethical things to maintain your lifestyle, which will eventually blow up
your life.
•If you center your life and identity on pleasure, gratification, and
comfort, you will find yourself getting addicted to something. You will
become chained to the “escape strategies” by which you avoid the
hardness of life.
•If you center your life and identity on relationships and approval, you
will be constantly overly hurt by criticism and thus always losing friends.
You will fear confronting others and therefore will be a useless friend.
•If you center your life and identity on a “noble cause,” you will divide

the world into “good” and “bad” and demonize your opponents. Ironically,
you will be controlled by your enemies. Without them, you have no
purpose.
•If you center your life and identity on religion and morality, you will, if
you are living up to your moral standards, be proud, self-righteous, and
cruel. If you don’t live up to your standards, your guilt will be utterly
devastating.
9. Thomas C. Oden, Two Worlds: Notes on the Death of Modernity in America
and Russia (IVP, 1992), Chapter 6.
10. It is important to remember that when you forgive a person that does not
mean that you don’t hold them accountable for what they have done. It is not an
either/or situation—you must do both. When the women were counseled to
forgive that does not mean they were advised to simply allow their husbands’
behavior to continue without confrontation. This is spelled out in more detail in
Chapter 11.
11. Darcey Steinke, Easter Everywhere: A Memoir (Bloomsbury, 2007), p. 114.
12. Cynthia Heimel, “Tongue in Chic” column, in The Village Voice, January 2,
1990, pp. 38–40.
13. Dorothy L. Sayers, Creed or Chaos? (Harcourt and Brace, 1949), pp. 38–39.
14. By far the best edition of this remarkable treatise is printed in Paul Ramsay,
The Works of Jonathan Edwards: Ethical Writings, vol. 8 (Yale University Press,
1989). The introductory notes by Ramsay are very important.
15. Debra Rienstra, So Much More: An Invitation to Christian Spirituality
(Jossey-Bass, 2005), p. 41.

ELEVEN—Religion and the Gospel

1. In the broader sense, religion is any belief system of ultimate values that
shapes our pursuit of a particular kind of life in the world. This is the reason that

it is quite fair to call secularism a religion, and Christianity as well. However,
virtually all religions require to one degree or another a form self-salvation
through merit. They require that people approach God and become worthy
through various rites, observances, and behaviors. This is also what most people
think of when they think of religion, and in this sense Christianity as presented
in the New Testament is radically distinct. That is why for the purposes of this
chapter we will speak of Christianity as distinct from “religion.”
2. Flannery O’Connor, Wise Blood: Three by Flannery O’Connor (Signet, 1962),
p. 16.
3. Richard Lovelace, The Dynamics of Spiritual Life (IVP, 1979), pp. 212ff.
4. On how self is created by exclusion—Miroslav Volf, Exclusion and Embrace
(Abingdon, 1996).
5. Victor Hugo, Les Miserables, Book One, Chapter 13, “Little Gervais.”

TWELVE—The (True) Story of the Cross

1. C. S. Lewis, Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer (Harcourt Brace, and
World, 1964), p. 106.
2. For a full discussion of Bonhoeffer’s example of forgiveness, see Chapter 1,
“The Cost of Forgiveness: Dietrich Bonhoeffer and the Reclamation of a
Christian Vision and Practice,” in L. Gregory Jones, Embodying Forgiveness: A
Theological Analysis (Eerdmans, 1995).
3. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship (Macmillan, 1967), p. 100.
4. Eberhard Bethge, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, eds. Letters and Papers from Prison,
abridged. (London: SCM Press, 1953), p. 144.
5. The charge that the Cross is “divine child abuse” seems to assume that the
Father in heaven is the real God and Jesus is just some other kind of divine being
who is being killed. This fails to do justice to the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity. Christians believe that though the Father and the Son are distinct

persons, they share the same being and substance, so that when Jesus bore the
cost of forgiveness it was God doing so. For more on the Trinity see Chapter 13.
6. An illustration is in order. Imagine that you are walking along a river with a
friend, and your friend suddenly says to you, “I want to show you how much I
love you!” and with that he throws himself into the river and drowns. Would you
say in response, “How he loved me!” No, of course not. You’d wonder about
your friend’s mental state. But what if you were walking along a river with a
friend and you fell into the river by accident, and you can’t swim. What if he
dived in after you and pushed you to safety but was himself drawn under by the
current and drowned. Then you would respond, “Behold, how he loved me!” The
example of Jesus is a bad example if it is only an example. If there was no peril
to save us from—if we were not lost apart from the ransom of his death—then
the model of his sacrificial love is not moving and life-changing; it is crazy.
Unless Jesus died as our substitute, he can’t die as a moving example of
sacrificial love.
7. Quoted in David Van Biema, “Why Did Jesus Have to Die?” Time, April 12,
2004, p. 59.
8. John Stott, The Cross of Christ (Inter-Varsity Press, 1986), p. 160.
9. JoAnne Terrell’s story is recounted in Van Biema, “Why Did Jesus Have to
Die?,” p. 61. The John Stott quote is found on the same page.
10. N. T. Wright, Simply Christian (Harper, 2006), p. 110.
11. Matthew 27:45–46.
12. “The Gospels contain…a story of a larger kind which embraces all the
essence of [other] stories. But this story has entered history and the primary
world…[T]his story is supreme; and it is true.” J. R. R. Tolkien, “On Fairy
Stories,” in The Tolkien Reader (Del Rey, 1986).

THIRTEEN—The Reality of the Resurrection

1. Bauckham, Eyewitnesses, p. 273.
2. N. T. Wright, The Resurrection of the Son of God (Fortress, 2003), p. 608.
3. Ibid., pp. 686, 688.
4. It is common for people to claim that the idea of “dying and rising gods” was
found in religions all over the ancient Near East. Yes, those myths existed, but
even if you suppose Jesus’s Jewish followers knew those pagan legends (which
is not at all certain) nobody even in the pagan religions believed that resurrection
happened to individual human beings. See N. T. Wright, Simply Christian, p.
113, and his extensive research on dying-and-rising-god myths in Resurrection
of the Son of God.
5. Wright., The Resurrection of the Son of God (Fortress, 2003), pp. 200–206.
6. Wright, Who Was Jesus? (Eerdmans, 1993), p. 63.
7. Wright, The Resurrection of the Son of God (Fortress, 2003), pp. 578–83.
8. Ibid., p. 552.
9. Ibid., p. 707 and n. 63.
10. N. T. Wright, For All God’s Worth: True Worship and the Calling of the
Church (Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 65–66.

FOURTEEN—The Dance of God

1. Hilary of Poitiers, in Concerning the Trinity (3:1), says each person of the
Trinity “reciprocally contains the others, so that one permanently envelopes and
is permanently enveloped by, the others whom he yet envelopes.” See also
Robert Letham on Tom Torrance: The Holy Trinity: In Scripture, History,
Theology, and Worship (Presbyterian and Reformed, 2004), pp. 265, 373.
“Perichoresis” involves mutual movement as well as mutual indwelling. It is the
eternal movement of Love or the Communion of Love which the Holy Trinity is
ever within himself.”

2. Cornelius Plantinga, Engaging God’s World: A Christian Vision of Faith,
Learning, and Living (Eerdmans, 2002).
3. C. S. Lewis, “The Good Infection,” in Mere Christianity.
4. There are many very profound implications of Trinitarian thought that have
been traced out by thinkers over the centuries. The ancient problem of the One
and the Many—from Plato and Aristotle through to Modernity and
Postmodernity—has bedeviled philosophers for centuries. Is unity more
important than particularity, or vica versa? Is the individual more important than
the group, or vice versa? Are universals more important than particularities and
contexts, or vice versa? Cultures have had to choose between absolutism and
relativism, between individualism and collectivism. But if God is triune and is as
much a unity as a diversity, then Trinitarian philosophical thought should not fit
on the spectrum between absolutism and relativism, nor should its social thought
fit on a spectrum between collectivism and individualism. Neither the individual
nor the family/tribe should be the ultimate social unit. Neither legalism nor
relativism should characterize the moral philosophy. For some extremely
stimulating reflections on the promise of Trinitarian thought, see the works of
Colin Gunton, particularly The One, the Three, and the Many (Bampton
Lectures) (Cambridge University Press, 1993); The Triune Creator: A Historical
and Systematic Study (Eerdmans, 1998); and The Promise of Trinitarian
Theology (T.&T. Clark, 2004).
5. Consider the statement of Lee Khan Yew, Senior Minister of Singapore, on the
controversy over the judicial caning of Michael Fay in 1994. To Western
journalists he said, “To us in Asia, an individual is an ant. To you, he’s a child of
God. It is an amazing concept.” Quoted in Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s
Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meaning of Life (1995), p. 474.
6. G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy (Dodd, Mead, 1959), p. 245. Quoted in Rienstra,
So Much More, p. 37.
7. “What we have, then, is a picture of God whose love, even before the creation
of anything, is other-oriented…. There has always been an other-orientation in
the very nature of God…. We are the friends of God by virtue of the intraTrinitarian love of God that so worked out in the fullness of time that the plan of
redemption, conceived in the mind of God in eternity past, has exploded into our
space-time history at exactly the right moment.” D. A. Carson, The Difficult

Doctrine of the Love of God (IVP/UK, 2000), pp. 44–45.
8. George Marsden, Jonathan Edwards: A Life (Yale University Press, 2003), pp.
462–63.
9. Rienstra, So Much More, p. 38.
10. C. S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain (Macmillan, 1961), p. 140.
11. Vinoth Ramachandra, The Scandal of Jesus (IVP, 2001).
12. C. S. Lewis, The Last Battle (Collier, 1970), pp. 171, 184.

Epilogue

1. “Letter to Mr.–.” Flannery O’Connor: Collected Works (Library of America,
1988), p. 1148.
2. “The Fiction Writer and His Country.” Flannery O’Connor: Collected Works
(Library of America, 1988), pp. 804–805.
3. From a sermon by Dick Lucas, Matthew 11.
4. Quotes from “Revelation” in Three by Flannery O’Connor (Penguin, 1983).
5. Joseph Epstein, “The Green Eyed Monster: Envy Is Nothing to Be Jealous
Of,” Washington Monthly, July/August 2003.

INDEX

The Abolition of Man (Lewis)
abolition of slavery
abuses of religion
Africa
African-Americans
After the Fall (Miller)
All-encompassing Theory
Alston, William
anger of God
Angels with Dirty Faces (Cagney)
Anglo-Saxons
Anthropic Principle
apostles
Apostle’s Creed
arrogance of believers
Asia
Assayas, Michka
Atran, Scott
Audi, Robert
Augustine
An Autobiography (Gandhi)
autonomy
Barbour, Ian
Barrett, Justin
barriers to belief
Barth, Karl

Bauckham, Richard
beauty
Becker, Ernest
behavior of Christians
belief and believers
arrogance of
behavior of
doubt of
growth in numbers
nonbelievers compared to
practices of
Bellah, Robert
Berger, Peter L.
Bernstein, Leonard
Bible
counterproductive content of
Bible
and culture
and evolutionary science
as historical document
interpretations of
and literalism
literary form of
on nature of God
origins of
primary messages of
and revisionism
scholarship of
and science
on sin
and timing of gospel composition
understanding offensive content
Big Bang
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich
Bono
Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon (Dennett)
Britain
Brooks, David
Brown, Dan

Brown, Wendy
Buddhism
and defining religion
demographic centers of
and Japanese empire
and Keller
and other religions
and personal freedom
and personality

Cagney, James
Calvin, John
Cambodia
Camus, Albert
Carter, Stephen L.
Catholic Church
Chappell, David L.
character flaws of Christians
Chariots of Fire (film)
Chesterton, G. K.
China
and Communism
growth of Christianity in,
rejection of religion in
Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt (Rice)
church attendance
church body
Churchland, Patricia
circumcision
Civil Rights movement
clues of God
beauty
and evolutionary science
origins of the universe
regularity of nature
Collins, Francis
Communism
and Catholic church

and divine judgment
growth of Christianity in
rejection of religion
community
condemnation of religion
The Confessions (Augustine)
Confucianism
conservatism
Constantine
constraints
The Cost of Discipleship (Bonhoeffer)
Council of Nicea
Creation Science
Creed or Chaos? (Sayers)
cross and the crucifixion
and forgiveness
and the Great Reversal
love and personal exchange
perceptions of
and role of church
sacrificial nature of
and suffering
The Cross of Christ (Stott)
Crusades
culture
and Bible
and Christian doctrine
diversity in
and divine judgment
effect of religion on
and relativism
and religious belief
and values

Danto, Arthur C.
Darwin, Charles
The Da Vinci Code (Brown)
Dawkins, Richard

anti-religion sentiments of,
on belief
on evolutionary science
on existence of God
on Fine-Tuning Argument
scholarly critiques of
on science and religion
“A Declaration in Defense of Science and Secularism,”
defining religion
Delbanco, Andrew
DeLorean, John
The Denial of Death (Becker)
Dennett, Daniel C.
anti-religion sentiments of,
on evolutionary science
Dennett
scholarly critiques of
on science and religion
as skeptic
Derrida, Jacques
Dershowitz, Alan
Dickens, Charles
Dillard, Annie
discipline
“The Discreet Charms of Nihilism” (Milosz)
divisiveness of religion
divorce
Dostoevsky, Fyodor
doubt
Dworkin, Ronald

Eagleton, Terry
Easter Everywhere: A Memoir (Steinke)
Eastern religions
The Economist
Edwards, Jonathan
Enlightenment
Epstein, Joseph

equality of major religions
equality of people
ethnocentrism
Europe
evil. See also suffering
evolutionary science
exclusivity of religion
and actions of Christians
and community
and condemning religion
and fanaticism
and outlawing religion
and privately practiced religion
and tolerance
existence of God. See also clues of God; knowledge of God
extremism

faith
Falwell, Jerry
fanaticism
“The Fiction Writer and His Country” (O’Connor)
Fine-Tuning Argument
Fish, Stanley
Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn
Foot, Philippa
forgiveness
Foucault, Michel
freedom
and community
constraints on
and culture
defining
in expression of Christian values
and hell
and Islam
and love
as priority
and truth

French Revolution
Freud, Sigmund
fundamentalism

Gaita, Raimond
Gandhi, Mohandas
Garden of Gethsemane
Garrett, Lynn
gender roles
Ghana
Gingerich, Owen
Gnostic gospels
Gnosticism
The God Delusion (Dawkins)
on belief
critiques of
on Fine-Tuning Argument
on religious scientists
God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything (Hitchens)
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
Goldman, Emma
Gopnik, Adam
gospels
Gould, Stephen Jay
grace
about
common grace
and fanaticism
and moral effort
religion and the gospel
and self-centeredness
threat of
The Great Divorce (Lewis)
Greco-Roman world
Greek culture
Habermas, Jürgen

Habits of the Heart (Bellah)
happiness
Harris, Sam
on creation of the universe
on evolutionary science
on science and religion
as skeptic
Hawking, Stephen
Hebrew culture
Heimel, Cynthia
hell. See judgment and hell
Henig, Robin Marantz
Hick, John
Hinduism
Hirshman, Linda
historical context of religion
Hitchens, Christopher
Hitler, Adolf
Hope Has Its Reasons (Pippert)
Hugo, Victor
human rights
Hume, David
humility

I, Robot (film)
identity, sources of
image of God, doctrine of
inclusion
independence
individualism
injustice
and Civil Rights movement
and critique of religion
and the cross
and divine judgment
and failings of Christians
fanaticism
in Jesus’s name

slavery
violence and religion
Inquisition
intellectual barriers to belief
Intelligent Design
intolerance
Irenaeus of Lyons
irreligious people. See nonbelievers
“Is Christianity Hard or Easy?” (Lewis)
Islam
and freedom
growth in
and language
and other religions
on personal relationship with God
and terrorism
Israel
Is There a God? (Swinburne)

Japanese empire
Jesus
and Christian doctrine
and constraints on freedom
critique of religion
and culture
divinity of
and doubt
and eyewitnesses
and fanaticism
and forgiveness
and grace
“historical Jesus,”
and injustice
and martyrs
miracles of
and perceptions of believers
and Peter’s denial of
and redemption

and resurrection
suffering of
See also cross and the crucifixion
Jesus and the Eyewitnesses (Bauckham)
Jesus Rediscovered (Muggeridge),
Jesus Seminar
joy
Judaism
judgment and hell
and American culture
and equality of people
experience of
and God of love
and justice
as metaphor
necessity of

Kant, Immanuel
Keller, Kathy
Kierkegaard, Soren
King, Martin Luther, Jr.
knowledge of God
and human rights
and morality
and nature’s violence
Korea
Kreeft, Peter
Lane, Bill
The Language of God (Collins)
languages of Christians
Larson, Edward
The Last Word (Nagel)
Latimer, Hugh
Latin America
Lazarus and the Rich Man (parable)
leaders, moral failings of

Leff, Arthur
Leslie, John
Les Misérables (Hugo)
Letters to Malcolm (Lewis)
Leuba, James
Lewis, C. S.
on beauty
on Bible
on differences between religions,
on divinity of Jesus
on existence of God
on forgiveness
on hell
on judgment
on love
on resurrection
on salvation
on science
on sin
on suffering
on truth
liberalism
Life’s Dominion (Dworkin)
Lilla, Mark
The Lord of the Rings (Tolkien),
Lord’s Prayer
Lovelace, Richard

MacDonald, George
MacIntyre, Alasdair
Mackie, J. L.
Macquarrie, John
magic
marriage
Marsden, George
martyrs
Marxism
Maugham, Somerset

McGrath, Alister
Middle East
Midwestern United States
Miller, Arthur
Milosz, Czeslaw
A Mind at the End of Its Tether (Wells)
The Miracle of Theism (Mackie)
miracles
morality
and existence of God
and failings of Christians
and fanaticism
and grace
and individualism
lack of basis for
and liberal democracy
moral absolutes
moral obligation
moral relativism
of nonbelievers
Muggeridge, Malcolm
multiculturalism

Nagel, Thomas
narrative identities
National Academy of Sciences
naturalism and natural selection,
nature, regularity of
The Nature of True Virtue (Edwards)
Nazism
New York City
Niebuhr, Reinhold
Nietzsche, Friedrich
Nigeria
nominal Christians
nonbelievers
compared to believers
and divine judgment

growth in
Jesus on
morality of
and suffering
treatment of
See also skepticism and skeptics
North Americans

O’Connor, Flannery
Oden, Thomas
one true religion. See exclusivity of religion
oral traditions
outlawing of religion
paganism
palingenesis
Pascal, Blaise
peace
Peck, M. Scott
Perry, Michael J.
Pharisaic Christians
Pippert, Becky
Plantinga, Alvin
on evolutionary science
on existence of God
on infinite universes
“no-see-ums” illustration of
on religious culture
on science and religion
on wickedness
pluralism
politics
Popieluszko, Jerzy
poverty and the poor
power
practices vs. beliefs
privately practiced religion

purpose of life

racial diversity
Ramachandra, Vinoth
rationality
Rawls, John
The Real American Dream: A Meditation on Hope (Delbanco)
recollective memory
Redeemer Presbyterian Church
redemption
regularity of nature
relativism
resistance movements
respect for other faiths
resurrection
The Resurrection of the Son of God (Wright)
retaliation
The Return of the King (Tolkien),
“Revelation” (O’Connor)
Rice, Anne
Ridley, Nicholas
rights
Robertson, Pat
Rocky (film)
Romero, Oscar
Rorty, Richard
A Rumor of Angels (Berger)
Russell, Bertrand
Sagan, Françoise
Sanneh, Lamin
Sartre, Jean-Paul
Sayers, Dorothy
science
and Barbour’s model
Creation Science
and C. S. Lewis

evolutionary science
and magic
and miracles
relationship with Christianity
religious scientists
secularism
and cultural diversity
on death
effect on culture of
and moral obligation
secularism
and technological advancements
and violence
self-centered orientation
sexual ethics
shalom
Shintoism
A Short History of the World (Wells)
The Sickness Unto Death (Kierkegaard)
Siegel, H.
sin
cosmic consequences of
doctrine of
and forgiveness
and hope
meaning of
personal consequences of
social consequences of
Singer, Peter
skepticism and skeptics
faith of
growth in
as proselytizers
and truth
See also nonbelievers
slavery and slave trade
Smith, Christian
social justice
Society of Christian Philosophers,

Sommerville, C. John
South African Commission for Truth and Reconciliation
Southern United States
Soviet Russia
Stark, Rodney
Steinke, Darcey
Stevenson, Robert Louis
Stoicism
Stott, John
straitjacket, Christianity as. See freedom
The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (Stevenson)
suffering
and existence of God
and forgiveness
of Jesus
reasons for
and redemption
and resurrection
Swinburne, Richard

A Tale of Two Cities (Dickens)
Taylor, Barbara Brown
Taylor, Vincent
technological advancements
Temperley, Howard
Ten Commandments
Terrell, JoAnne
Tolkien, J. R. R.
Tolstoy, Leo
Torrey, R. A.
Toward a Theory of Human Rights (Perry)
Trinity
Trivers, Robert
tsunami of 2004
Tutu, Desmond
Under God? Religious Faith and Liberal Democracy (Perry)

universe, origins of
universities
Updike, John
U.S. Supreme Court

values
Van Biema, David
Vansina, Jan
violence
and the cross
and divine judgment
and exclusive beliefs
and fundamentalism
of nature
and religion
Volf, Miroslav
Waiting for God (Weil)
Walesa, Lech
Walls, Andrew
Warren, Rick
Weber, Max
Weil, Simone
Wells, H. G.
Westphal, Merold
Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (MacIntyre)
widows
Wieseltier, Leon
Wilberforce, William
Wilson, David Sloan
Wilson, E. O.
Witham, Larry
women
Woolman, John
worldviews
Wright, N. T.
on bodily resurrection,

on challenges to resurrection,
on changes in beliefs
on crucifixion
on eyewitnesses of resurrection,
on meaning of resurrection,

Zen Buddhism

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Timothy Keller was born and raised in Pennsylvania, and educated at Bucknell
University, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary, and Westminster
Theological Seminary. However, he learned the most from his nine years as a
pastor of West Hopewell Presbyterian Church in the small blue-collar town of
Hopewell, Virginia. The congregation there loved him, suffered through his
earliest days as a pastor, and taught an overeducated, egg-headed Northerner to
be CLEAR. His second church was Redeemer Presbyterian Church, in
Manhattan, which he started in 1989 with his wife, Kathy, and their three young
sons. Today Redeemer has nearly six thousand regular attendees at five services,
a host of daughter churches, and is planting churches in large cities throughout
the world.

